# Chapter 5: Commitment and Advancement
book: TheMomTest
pages: 62-73
section_id: chapter-5

--- page 62 ---
CHAPTER FIVE
Commitment and
advancement
Once we've learned the key facts about our industry and customers, it’s time
to zoom in again and start revealing our idea and showing some product.
The bad news is that this invites nefarious compliments. The good news is
that since we have the beginnings of a product, we're now in a position to
cut through the false positives by asking for commitments.
In sales, moving a sales relationship to the next stage is called
"advancement". It's like pushing a customer into the next step of your real-
world acquisition funnel. They'll either move forward or make it clear that
they're not a customer. Both are good results for your learning. 
When you fail to push for advancement, you end up with zombie leads:
potential customers (or investors) who keep taking meetings with you and
saying nice things, but who never seem to cut a check. It's like your startup
has been friend-zoned. Thankfully, you caused it, and that means you can fix
it. It's a consequence of being clingy and fearing rejection. By giving them a
clear chance to either commit or reject us, we get out of the friend-zone and
can identify the real leads. 
As always, you’re not trying to convince every person to like what you’re
doing. When you’ve got the information you came for (even if it’s that they
don’t care), you can leave. But at some point, you do need to put them to a
decision in order to get it.
Symptoms:
63

--- page 63 ---
A pipeline of zombie leads
Ending product meetings with a compliment
Ending product meetings with no clear next steps
Meetings which "went well"
They haven't given up anything of value
As I use them in a customer learning context, commitment and advancement
are separate concepts which overlap quite a lot and tend to appear together.
Commitment — They are showing they’re serious by giving up
something they value such as time, reputation, or money. 
Advancement — They are moving to the next step of your real-world
funnel and getting closer to a sale.
Commitment and advancement often arrive hand-in-hand. For example, to
move to the next step (advancement), you might need an introduction to your
contact’s boss (reputation commitment). As such, they are functionally
equivalent for our purposes and I’m going to blur them into one concept for
the following sections.
Rule of thumb: “Customers” who keep being friendly but aren’t ever going
to buy are a particularly dangerous source of mixed signals.
Meetings succeed or fail
It took me years to learn that there’s no such thing as a meeting which just
"went well". Every meeting either succeeds or fails. You've lost the meeting
when you leave with a compliment or a stalling tactic. While we might spot
something as blatant as "Let's talk again after the holidays... Don't call me,
I'll call you," we accept the more subtle versions every day.
A meeting has succeeded when it ends with a commitment to advance to the
next step. But you have to force this resolution or the meetings drift along in
la-la-land while performing their ancient duty: wasting everyone’s time. 
64

--- page 64 ---
If you leave with worthless wishy washiness, I'd bet you're falling for one
or both of the following traps:
1. You're asking for their opinion about your idea (e.g. fishing for
compliments)
2. You're not asking for a clear commitment or next steps
You know how to deal with compliments by now: deflect, ignore, and get
back to business. Commitments are similarly easy to master, once we know
what we’re looking for. When we leave without a commitment, sometimes
it’s because we asked and got rejected. That’s sad, but it happens. Not
everyone is going to convert and at least you now know where you stand.
You have a strong negative data point.
The real failure is listed above as #2: not even asking. I never consider
rejection to be a real failure. But not asking certainly is. This can happen
because you avoid the scary question or because you haven’t figured out
what the next steps should be.
Commitment is important. It tells us whether people are actually telling the
truth. The more they give us, the more we can trust what they say. 
Rule of thumb: If you don’t know what happens next after a product or sales
meeting, the meeting was pointless.
The currencies of conversation
Commitment can be cash, but doesn’t have to be. Think of it in terms of
currency—what are they giving up for you? A compliment costs them
nothing, so it’s worth nothing and carries no data. The major currencies are
time, reputation risk, and cash.
A time commitment could include: 
Clear next meeting with known goals
65

--- page 65 ---
Sitting down to give feedback on wireframes
Using a trial themselves for a non-trivial period
Reputation risk commitments might be: 
Intro to peers or team
Intro to a decision maker (boss, spouse, lawyer)
Giving a public testimonial or case study
Financial commitments are easier to imagine and include:
Letter of intent (non-legal but gentlemanly agreement to purchase)
Pre-order
Deposit
Sometimes, strong commitments combine multiple currencies, such as
someone agreeing to run a paid trial with their whole team, thus risking their
time, money, and reputation.
Just like compliments aren’t data when you’re trying to learn about a
problem, they also aren’t progress when you’re trying to validate a product.
Hearing a compliment can still be useful though—it’s a warning flag that the
person you’re talking to is trying to get rid of you.
Rule of thumb: The more they’re giving up, the more seriously you can take
their kind words.
Good meeting / bad meeting
   
Game time again. We just had a meeting. But how did it go? Were they good
meetings or bad meetings? Why? And if they’re bad, what can we do to fix
them?
Have a think about the meetings listed below and then turn the page for
further discussion.
66

--- page 66 ---
“That’s so cool. I love it!”
“Looks great. Let me know when it launches.”
“There are a couple people I can intro you to when you’re ready.”
“What are the next steps?”
“I would definitely buy that.”
“When can we start the trial?”
“Can I buy the prototype?”
“When can you come back to talk to the rest of the team?”
67

--- page 67 ---
"That's so cool. I love it!"
Bad meeting. Pure, unadulterated compliment. This may make you feel good,
but there is precisely zero data here. But at least you won’t hurt yourself on
this one since it’s so obviously fluff.
To fix it, deflect the compliment and get back to business.
"Looks great. Let me know when it launches."
Bad meeting. A compliment plus a stalling tactic is the classic way to end a
pitch for something you’re never going to buy. This comes in a lot of
flavours, but they’re all basically a polite way to say, “Don’t call me, I’ll
call you.” 
The big error you can make here is to mistake this compliment-stall for a
pre-order (“He said he’ll buy it when it launches!”). To fix it, I’d look for a
commitment I could ask for today. 
If I was very early stage, I might ask for an introduction to his boss or tech
team or the budget-holder so I can make sure I fully understand their needs. 
If I was slightly further through development, I might push him to agree to be
one of our alpha users and to roll it out to some subset of their team and be a
case study for launch. If I’ve hit on a real problem, he’ll jump at the chance
to start making progress today and get early access.
68

--- page 68 ---
"There are a couple people I can introduce you to when
you're ready."
Nearly a good meeting, but right now it’s bad. There’s some data here, but
probably not as much as you initially hope. On the bright side, at least you
know he doesn’t think you’re completely nuts or he wouldn’t have even
made the fluffy offer (unless he’s just name dropping). The problem is that
the promise is so generic that it’s a worthless signal. 
To fix it, try to convert fuzzy promises into something more concrete. The
more specific it is, the more seriously you can take it. For example: who
does he want to introduce you to and what does “ready” mean? And why
can’t he make the intro now? This isn’t about being pushy. You don’t have
manifest destiny over his rolodex. But you do need to distinguish between
legitimate offers and polite gesturing. Knowing what “ready” means can
also give you a better sense of what your short-term goals should be.
"What are the next steps?"
Good meeting. A classic good meeting conclusion. To succeed, a meeting
doesn’t need to end with a check in your pocket. It just needs to advance to
the next step, whatever that is.
It's worth noting that you need to know your next steps to benefit from this. If
you have to say, “Let me have a think about that and get back to you,” then
you’ve ruined a perfectly good meeting.
Of course, even clear next steps can be a lie. Everything can be a lie. But
with next steps in your pocket, you've got a fighting chance.
69

--- page 69 ---
"I would definitely buy that."
Bad meeting. Danger! There’s admittedly some signal here, but the false
positive danger is off the charts. This is the mis-interpreted answer which
sunk the first startup I worked at to the tune of ten million bucks.
To fix it, you need to shift from fuzzy future promises into concrete current
commitments. For example, you could ask for a letter of intent, a pre-
purchase or deposit, or intros to other decision makers and team members.
Kickstarter is so wonderful because it forces customers who say they would
buy it to actually pull out a credit card and commit.
"When can we start the trial?"
Maybe a good meeting. Unlike “when does it launch," which is usually a
stall, “When can we start” is a step forward. Setting up new software and
training staff to use it is a big deal for most businesses. Even a "free" trial
can cost them serious money. However, in some cases, "trying" software
costs nothing, especially for individuals. For example, I've “tried” countless
CRM (contact management) apps. It takes ten seconds to log in, look around,
and never think about it again.
As always, think in terms of currency. What are they giving up to try it out?
If your trial is too "cheap" to try, you can try to increase the cost of it. For
example, you could ask to write a case study about them after they've spent
2 weeks using it. Or you could get them to promise to try using it with their
team for at least a week. If you've got a more developed product, you can
take their credit card and just charge them nothing if they cancel within 30
days. The more they are giving up for you, the more seriously you can take
their validation.
70

--- page 70 ---
"Can I buy the prototype?"
Great meeting. The best meeting conclusion I've seen is the rarely-heard but
always appreciated, “Can I buy the prototype?” 
A product designer was once showing me a brilliant smartphone tripod he
was designing. He demo’d the 3D-printed prototype unit for me and I
immediately asked him how much it would cost to buy the prototype. He
laughed and said he’d gone through about a dozen prototypes already
because people kept buying them. That’s a good sign.
"When can you come back to talk to the rest of the team?"
Good meeting. Bingo! If you are selling anything to companies, you’re going
to have to talk to multiple people. If they won’t introduce you, then it’s a
sure bet you’re at a dead end.
Enterprise sales is tedious, but one of the perks is that you can get really
accurate signals like this one quite early in the process. Building consumer
products is a lot murkier since the customer conversation process doesn’t
mimic the purchase process.
How to fix a bad meeting
The worst meetings are the wishy-washy ones that you leave with neither
rejection nor advancement. You are in no-man’s-land and you won’t learn
anything until you fix the meeting by forcing a next step (or rejection).
A lost meeting can often be saved by just pushing for a commitment at the
end while you're being brushed off with a compliment. 
But don't be annoying. You aren't trying to strong-arm folks into handing
over their wallet. You are trying to cut through some of the polite rejections
and find out if they're actually going to become a partner/investor/customer.
If they aren't excited, then good news: you got the information you came for.
Assimilate it, decide if it matters enough to change your strategy, and then
keep on keeping on. The goal is just to put them to a decision so you can
71

--- page 71 ---
learn whether you've found a must-have product and a real customer.
Rule of thumb: It’s not a real lead until you’ve given them a concrete chance
to reject you.
Don't pitch blind
Even once you've moved on to more product-focused sales meetings, you
still want to start with some open-ended learning to get your bearings. You
may know what the market cares about, but figuring out what’s unique about
this particular person feels. It will make the rest of the conversation much
smoother, increases your chances of closing the deal, and also gives you
ongoing learning even after you've got a product. 
Startup sales meetings too often go like this: 
You: "We do X. Want to buy it?" 
Them: "No thanks."
Those rejections aren't helpful. Hard pitching gives binary feedback: you
either nailed it or you didn't. That's okay when you're making fine
adjustments (tweak this feature) but bad for bigger questions (does anybody
care at all about what I'm doing).
Ask learning questions which pass The Mom Test. Then confirm by selling
it. This happens over both the life of your company and during a single
meeting.
Crazy customers and your first sale
It’s pretty weird that anybody buys anything from young startups. In all
likelihood, before the year is up, you’re going to either go out of business,
abandon the product, or sell the company. And even if you stay the course,
there’s no guarantee you can actually do what you say you can do.
First customers are crazy. Crazy in a good way. They really, really want
72

--- page 72 ---
what you’re making. They want it so badly that they’re willing to be the
crazy person who tries it first. 
Keep an eye out for the people who get emotional about what you’re doing.
There is a significant difference between: “Yeah, that’s a problem” and
“THAT IS THE WORST PART OF MY LIFE AND I WILL PAY YOU
RIGHT NOW TO FIX IT.” 
Steve Blank calls them earlyvangelists (early evangelists). In the enterprise
software world, they are the people who:
Have the problem
Know they have the problem
Have the budget to solve the problem
Have already cobbled together their own makeshift solution
They’re the company who will commit way before it makes rational sense
to do so. It’s the guy who will give you cash right now from his
discretionary budget to run a trial. Or who will fight for you against his boss
and lawyers when they’re saying the tech is unproven.
In the consumer space, it’s the fan who wants your product to succeed so
badly that they’ll front you the money as a pre-order when all you’ve got is
a duct-tape prototype. They're the one who will tell all their friends to chip
in as well. They’re the person reading your blog and searching for
workarounds.
We’ve got 2 takeaways.
Firstly, when someone isn’t that emotional about what you’re doing, it’s
pretty unlikely that they’re going to end up being one of the people who is
crazy enough to be your first customer. Keep them on the list, but don’t count
on them to write the first check.
Secondly, whenever you see the deep emotion, do your utmost to keep that
person close. They are the rare, precious fan who will get you through the
hard times and turn into your first sale.
73

--- page 73 ---
In summary, after you've learned the facts of your industry and customers
and designed the solution, you start pushing for advancement and
commitments to separate dead leads from real customers.
Rule of thumb: In early stage sales, the real goal is learning. Revenue is just
a side-effect.
74