# Chapter 6: Finding Conversations
book: TheMomTest
pages: 74-88
section_id: chapter-6

--- page 74 ---
CHAPTER SIX
Finding
conversations
Now that you know how to ask good questions and fix bad meetings, you
know enough to have good customer conversations. Take this opportunity to
go flex your conversational muscles and talk to some people. 
If you’re scratching your own itch with this business, you likely already
know your customers. Great! Go talk to them. Now that you’re armed with
The Mom Test, they won’t be able to lie to you even though they know you.
But if you don’t already know folks, where do these conversations and
meetings come from?
75

--- page 75 ---
Going to them
   
Drumming up good conversations from cold leads is hard. It’s doable and
sometimes you have no choice, but it’s far from ideal.
The goal of cold conversations is to stop having them. You hustle together
the first one or two from wherever you can, and then, if you treat people’s
time respectfully and are genuinely trying to solve their problem, those cold
conversations start turning into warm intros. The snowball is rolling.
Cold calls
What does it mean if you reach out to 100 people and 98 of them hang up on
you? Well, nothing, except that people don't like getting cold calls. No
surprise there. More importantly, it means you’ve now got 2 conversations
in play. Unless your plan is to sell your app via cold calls, the rejection rate
is irrelevant.
I know one team who successfully used cold LinkedIn messages to reach C-
level execs of several major UK retailers. They were ignored by practically
every exec in the country, but you only need one to say “yes” to start the
intro train.
Beyond hard hustle, you should also stay open to serendipity. There are lots
of ways you can get lucky when you’re in the mood for it.
Seizing serendipity
I was mulling over the idea of building tools for professional speakers and
found myself at a friend-of-a-friend’s engagement party. I heard someone
across the room say “my talk in Tokyo next week” and made a beeline over
to her. She left the party thinking I was a nice guy who was super interested
in her career and I left with a bunch of useful customer insight and a
commitment to use the prototype at her next talk.
If it sounds weird to unexpectedly interview people, then that's only the case
because you're thinking of it as an interview instead of a conversation. The
only thing people love talking about more than themselves is their problems.
By taking an interest in the problems and minutia of their day, you’re already
76

--- page 76 ---
being more interesting than 99% of the people they’ve ever met.
Rule of thumb: If it’s not a formal meeting, you don’t need to make excuses
about why you’re there or even mention that you’re starting a business. Just
have a good conversation.
Find a good excuse
I was chatting to an aspiring entrepreneur in a cafe. Among other things, his
product helped cafe owners educate potential customers on the origins and
backstory of their beans. He had been hitting the pavement for the past 2
weeks and getting turned away from cafe after cafe. He wanted to talk to me
about his customer interview process. Ten minutes into the conversation, I
cut in: “Who have you talked to so far?” “Nobody—I don’t know the
owners and the staff won’t help me.” “Have you talked to this cafe?” “No, I
don’t know them.” A waitress walked by and I flagged her down. “Excuse
me, can I speak to the owner?” “Umm.” “Don’t worry, it’s nothing bad. This
coffee is amazing and I wanted to ask him about the story behind the beans.”
The owner wasn't around, but with a good excuse in hand, we were soon
chatting with the manager. And the manager, in turn, gave us the owner’s
contact details and said he’d be in on Tuesday. 
You’ve go the ultimate excuse if you have a PhD student on your founding
team. “Hello, I’m doing my PhD research on the problems around X, it
would be a huge help if I could ask you a couple questions for my
dissertation.”
Rule of thumb: If it’s a topic you both care about, find an excuse to talk
about it. Your idea never needs to enter the equation and you’ll both enjoy
the chat.
Immerse yourself in where they are
I wanted to build tools for public speakers and conference organisers. I
knew a few at the lower and middle tiers, but none of the big names who
charge $5-50k per talk, who I thought might be a good customer segment for
obvious reasons. I hit the conference circuit and gave free talks everywhere
I could. 
77

--- page 77 ---
Permanently on the road, everywhere I went was an opportunity to meet new
speakers, do favours for event organisers, and learn what they care about.
By immersing myself in the community I met a load of people and soon had
all the connections and conversations I could handle (I ultimately decided
that big speakers and big conferences were a bad customer segment and
walked away—not every conversation has to end in finding out your idea is
awesome).
Landing pages
Joel Gascoigne did a classic "landing page" test with his startup Buffer,
describing the value proposition and collecting emails. But contrary to
popular understanding, it wasn't the metrics or conversion rate which
convinced him to move forward. Instead, it was the conversations which
resulted from emailing every single person who signed up and saying hello.
I'm skeptical of the quantitative validation of landing page metrics. But they
are certainly a great way to collect emails of qualified leads for you to
reach out to and strike up a conversation with.
Paul Graham recommends a generic launch for the same purposes. Get your
product out there, see who seems to like it most, and then reach out to those
users. 
This is starting to bring the customers to you instead of going to them, but
still involves sending a mostly cold email. Next we'll look at how to run
with this principle to make our lives even easier.
Bringing them to you
   
When you are finding ways to sneak into customer conversations, you're
always on the back foot. You made the approach, so they are suspicious and
trying to figure out if you're wasting their time. Instead, we can look for
ways to separate ourselves from the crowd so they can find us. Beyond
saving you vast sums of time and frustration, bringing people to you also
makes them take you more seriously and want to help you more. How can
you plant a flag your customers can see? What can you offer them that will
make them want to talk to you?
78

--- page 78 ---
Organise meetups
For marginally more effort than attending an event, you can organise your
own and benefit from being the centre of attention. 
Want to figure out the problems HR professionals have? Organise an event
called “HR professionals happy hour”. People will assume you’re credible
just because you happen to be the person who sent the invite emails or
introduced the speaker. You'll have an easy time chatting to them about their
problems.
Nobody ever follows this recommendation, but it’s the first thing I would do
if I got moved a new industry or geography. It’s literally the most unfair trick
I know for rapid customer learning. As a bonus, it also instantly bootstraps
your industry credibility.
Speaking & teaching
Teaching is under-valued as both a learning and selling tool. Let's say you're
making better project management software. In that case, you probably have
both expertise and a strongly held opinion about how things could be better.
That’s the magic combination for being an effective teacher.
Spend the time to teach. You'll find chances at conferences, workshops,
through online videos, blogging, or doing free consulting or office hours.
You'll refine your message, get in touch with a room full of potential
customers who take you seriously, and will learn which parts of your
offering resonate (before you’ve even built it). Then simply chat up the
attendees who are most keen.
Industry blogging
If you have a reasonably sized and relevant blog audience, lining up
conversations is a total non-issue. You just write a post about it and ask
people to get in touch. Of course, not everyone has a relevant audience.
That’s one big reason to start blogging to your customers today.
79

--- page 79 ---
Even when I had no audience, I still found blogging to be helpful. When I
sent cold emails from my blog email address, folks would often meet with
me because they had checked my domain, seen my industry blog, and figured
I was an interesting person to talk to. In other words, the traffic and
audience were irrelevant. Blogging about an industry is also a good
exercise to get your thoughts in a row. It makes you a better customer
conversationalist.
Get clever
I once heard a brilliant hack from a guy who wanted to sell to top-tier
universities like Stanford and Harvard. But first he needed to understand
their problems (difficult) and be taken seriously by the decision makers
(even more difficult).
His solution was to organise a semi-monthly "knowledge exchange" call
between the department heads of 3 top universities to discuss the challenges
around his topic of choice. Furthermore, it was set up as a conference call
where any other universities could dial in and listen to the best practices of
the big 3.
By simply organising the call and playing host, he immediately absorbed all
the credibility of the top universities and got direct phone access to a pile of
great leads.
Every business is different. Don't just copy what someone else is doing.
Consider your own situation, and then get clever.
Creating warm intros
   
Warm intros are the goal. Conversations are infinitely easier when you get
an intro through a mutual friend that establishes your credibility and reason
for being there.
7 degrees of bacon
The world is a relatively small place. Everyone knows someone. We just
have to remember to ask.
80

--- page 80 ---
I was talking to a team of recent graduates who needed to reach McKinsey
style consultants. They were pulling their hair out. We were in a coworking
space full of other young entrepreneurs, so I just stood on a chair and yelled,
“Excuse me! Does anyone here know anyone who works at McKinsey? Can
we talk to you for a second? We’ll buy you a beer — you could really help
us out!” They bought 3 beers, had 3 quick chats, and left with a diary full of
intros.
This is even easier for consumer products. Not everyone knows folks at
McKinsey, but everybody does know, for example, a recent mom or amateur
athlete or theatre enthusiast.
Rule of thumb: Kevin Bacon’s 7 degrees of separation applies to customer
conversations. You can find anyone you need if you ask for it a couple times.
Industry advisors
I relied heavily on advisors in my first company. We didn't know the
industry and nobody took us seriously. Our 5 advisors each had around a
half percent of equity and basically just made credible intros. I met with
each once per month, so I ended up getting a fresh batch of intros weekly
without it being a huge time burden for any of them.
On a bit of a tangent, you'd be surprised by the quality of the folks you can
get to join your advisory board. The first conversation with a good advisor
looks similar to the first conversation with a flagship customer: you get
along and are talking about a space you both care about. You can sometimes
poach killer advisors from your early customer conversations.
Universities
I'm jealous of founders who are still in (or recently out of) university.
Professors are a goldmine for intros. They get their grant funding from high-
level industry folks they're on good terms with. And since they’re investing
in research, those industry folks are self-selected to be excited about new
projects. 
Professors are easy to get in touch with if you don't know them yet. They
post their emails and you can just wander into their office.
81

--- page 81 ---
Investors
Top-tier investors are awesome for B2B intros. Beyond their own rolodex
and company portfolio, they can usually pull off cold intros to practically
any industry. Investors can also help you close higher-tier advisors and
directors than you'd be able to wrangle on your own.
Who has bought in to your idea already? Who could they connect you to?
Cash in favours
Remember all those people who brushed you off by saying, “Sounds great,
keep me in the loop and let me know how I can help.” 
Now’s the time to call in those favours. Yes, they might not have actually
meant it, but who cares? Reply back to that ancient email and tell them
you’re ready for an intro to that guy they know. Use the format in the next
section to make their lives easy and reassure them that you aren't going to
waste anybody's time.
You’ll get ignored a lot, but again, who cares? You aren’t trying to minimise
your failure rate; you’re trying to get a few conversations going. The person
you’re being introduced to won’t know the backstory anyway, so it’s a clean
start from there.
I wouldn’t make a habit of doing stuff like this since it’s a bit annoying and
can burn bridges, but sometimes you’re backed into a corner and need to get
started somehow.
Asking for and framing the meeting
Sometimes a proper meeting can't be avoided. For example, you might want
the full hour or need to talk to someone senior outside of your peer or
networking group. But since you don't necessarily have anything to sell, it's
unclear what the meeting is for. In those cases, the right explanation and
framing can do wonders.
82

--- page 82 ---
If you don’t know why you’re there, it becomes a sales meeting by default,
which is bad for 3 reasons. First, the customer closes up about some
important topics like pricing. Second, attention shifts to you instead of them.
And finally, it’s going to be the worst sales meeting ever because you aren’t
ready.
Symptoms:
“Um. So….”
“How’s it going?”
There are a lot of bad ways to frame the meeting, both when first asking for
it and once it begins.
Questions like, "Can I interview you" or "Thanks for agreeing to this
interview" both set set off alarm bells that this meeting is going to be super
boring. I don't want to be interviewed; I want to talk and help!
The common, "Can I get your opinion on what we're doing?" sets
expectations of neediness and that you want compliments or approval.
No expectations at all are set by, "Do you have time for a quick
coffee/lunch/chat/meeting?" which suggests you're liable to waste my time.
The framing format I like has 5 key elements.
1. You're an entrepreneur trying to solve horrible problem X, usher in
wonderful vision Y, or fix stagnant industry Z. Don't mention your idea.
2. Frame expectations by mentioning what stage you're at and, if it's true,
that you don't have anything to sell.
3. Show weakness and give them a chance to help by mentioning your
specific problem that you're looking for answers on. This will also
clarify that you're not a time waster.
4. Put them on a pedestal by showing how much they, in particular, can
help.
5. Ask for help.
83

--- page 83 ---
Or, in shorter form: Vision / Framing / Weakness / Pedestal / Ask
The mnemonic is “Very Few Wizards Properly Ask [for help]." Here's what
it might look like before you have a product:
Hey Pete, 
I'm trying to make desk & office rental less of a pain for new
businesses (vision). We're just starting out and don't have anything
to sell, but want to make sure we're building something that actually
helps (framing). 
I've only ever come at it from the tenant's side and I'm having a hard
time understanding how it all works from the landlord's perspective
(weakness). You've been renting out desks for a while and could
really help me cut through the fog (pedestal). 
Do you have time in the next couple weeks to meet up for a chat?
(ask)
Sometimes the 5 parts will be combined into just one or two sentences, or
they can be in a different order. For example, the next email sounded a little
too pitchy and I was worried he would delete it as sales spam before getting
through the first two sentences. As such, I moved my admission of weakness
as early as I could get it:
Hey Scott, I run a startup trying to make advertising more playful
and ultimately effective (vision). 
We're having a load of trouble figuring out how all the pieces of the
industry fit together and where we can best fit into it (weakness).
You know more about this industry than anyone and could really
save us from a ton of mistakes (pedestal). 
We're funded and have a couple products out already, but this is in
no way a sales meeting -- we're just moving into a new area and
could really use some of your expertise (framing). 
Can you spare a bit of time in the next week to help point us in the
84

--- page 84 ---
right direction over a coffee? (ask)
People like to help entrepreneurs. But they also hate wasting their time. An
opening like this tells them that you know what you need and that they'll be
able to make a real difference. 
Once the meeting starts, you have to grab the reins or it's liable to turn into
them drilling you on your idea, which is exactly what you don't want. To do
this, I basically repeat what I said in the email and then immediately drop
into the first question. If someone else made the introduction, I'll use them as
a voice of authority:
Hey Tim, thanks so much for taking the time. 
As I mentioned in the email, we're trying to make it easier for
universities to spin out student businesses (vision) and aren't
exactly sure how it all works yet (framing & weakness). 
I think Tom made this intro (authority) because you have pretty
unique insight into what's going on behind the curtain and could
really help us get pointed in the right direction (pedestal)…
(introductions continue)
I was looking at your spinout portfolio and it's pretty impressive,
especially company X. How did they get from your classroom to
where they are now? (grab the reins and ask good questions)
These conversations are easy to screw up. As such, you need to be the one
in control. You set the agenda, you keep it on topic, and you propose next
steps. Don't be a jerk about it, but do have a plan for the meeting and be
assertive about keeping it on track.
It’s worth noting that this is how I set up meetings from warm intros. The
main goal is to clarify what I need and how they can help. Cold approaches
are a totally different beast and are much more of a gamble. Again, the point
of cold calls is to stop having them. Find a clever ways to generate warm
intros and tell those people how they can help. You’ll have a much easier
time.
85

--- page 85 ---
86

--- page 86 ---
To commute or to call
One of the solutions to the time cost of these conversations is to move them
onto Skype or phone calls. In most situations, I don’t think the added volume
is worth the information you lose by not being in the room. I get confused
enough by what people are telling me in person. Losing access to their face
and body language feels like shooting myself in the foot.
More subtly, calls damage the delicate power dynamic of these
conversations. When someone is having a coffee with you, there’s the
potential to chat as friends. You can just shoot the breeze about the industry
for a bit. You can keep it casual. They’re enjoying the conversation
The same is decidedly not true on the phone or Skype. People try to squeeze
calls in between other activities, wondering how quickly they can “finish
with business” and hang up. Folks on the phone are super annoyed when you
“just want to chat”. So you need to make the whole thing more formal,
which is one of the exact mistakes we’re trying to avoid!
Phone calls end up sounding more like scripted interviews than natural
conversations, because they are. It’s a constraint of the medium.
Plus, nobody becomes friends over the phone, which means you aren't going
to get the warm intros and future meetings you need. Setting up a call feels
like less overhead in the short-term, but that’s because you aren’t yet able to
see all the time-saving and business-saving benefits of in-person
relationships with your customers. 
That being said, some other great people in the field like and recommend
phone calls. Use whatever works. But I will say that you should start in
person. It’s too easy to use surveys or phone calls as an excuse to skip the
awkwardness of meeting in person rather than as a considered trade-off.
87

--- page 87 ---
The advisory flip
In terms of mindset, don't go into these discussions looking for customers. It
creates a needy vibe and forfeits the position of power. Instead, go in search
of industry and customer advisors. You are just trying to find helpful,
knowledgable people who are excited about your idea.
With that mindset switch, you'll know why you're there. And instead of it
being a customer-learning-but-I-really-want-to-do-sales meeting, it's a let-
me-find-out-if-you-are-a-good-advisor-by-asking-lots-of-questions meeting.
Willpower is a finite resource. The way to overcome difficult situations
isn't to power through, but rather to change your circumstances to require
less willpower. Changing the context of the meeting to "looking for
advisors" is the equivalent of throwing out all your chocolate when you start
a diet. You change the environment to naturally facilitate your goals.
You don't need to explicitly tell them you're looking for advisors. In fact, I
wouldn't unless you already quite like them and it happens to come up in
conversation. It's really about orienting your state of mind to give you a
helpful internal narrative and consistent front.
Somewhat counterintuitively, the sales-advisor switch also puts you firmly
in control of the meeting, since you're now evaluating them. Even if the
topics of discussion are basically the same, you (and they) will notice the
difference.
88

--- page 88 ---
How many meetings
Every meeting has an opportunity cost. While you’re sitting in a bus on your
way there, you aren’t writing code or generating leads or drinking wine.
If you’re running a sales-driven business (especially enterprise sales), the
opportunity cost of early conversations is low since many of them will
become sales leads. You’re doubling up on learning and dealflow. 
The UX community (who knows their customer conversation!) says you
should keep talking to people until you stop hearing new information. 
In my experience, that could take as few as 3-5 conversations if you have a
relatively simple industry and a focused customer segment. If you’ve run
more than 10 conversations and are still getting results that are all over the
map, then I’d guess that your customer segment is too fuzzy and could stand
to be tightened up.
This isn’t about having a thousand meetings. It’s about quickly learning what
you need, and then getting back to building your business. You should be
able to answer almost any customer question and move onto new ones
within a week. 
Rule of thumb: Keep having conversations until you stop hearing new stuff.
89