# Chapter 8: Running the Process
book: TheMomTest
pages: 98-110
section_id: chapter-8

--- page 98 ---
CHAPTER EIGHT
Running the process
Even if you do everything else right, you can get bad results if you don’t
have the right process wrapped around your conversations. If you just show
up to meetings and hope for the best, you aren't making a good use of
anyone's time. You need to do a little bit of work before and after to extract
full value.
A common anti-pattern is for the business guy to go to all the meetings and
subsequently tell the rest of the team what they should do. Bad idea. Telling
the rest of the team “What I learned” is functionally equivalent to telling
them “What you’ll do.” Therefore, owning the customer conversations
creates a de-facto dictator with “The customer said so” as the ultimate
trump card. 
But as we’ve seen, it’s easy to misinterpret what the customer said.
When all the customer learning is stuck in someone’s head instead of being
disseminated to the rest of the team, you’ve got a learning bottleneck. Avoid
creating (or being) the bottleneck. To do that, the customer and learning has
to be shared with the entire founding team, promptly and faithfully. That
relies on good notes plus a bit of pre- and post-meeting work. 
The most extreme way to bottleneck is to go to the meetings alone and take
crappy notes which you don’t review with your team. At that point, your
head has become the ultimate repository of customer truth and everyone just
has to do what you say. 
In my case, I bottlenecked so hard that our CTO quit while saying, “We’re
never going to succeed if you keep changing what we’re doing.” In my
99

--- page 99 ---
defence, the stuff I’d learned was true (at least, I think it was). But it didn’t
matter anyway since I hadn’t properly communicated it to the rest of the
team.
Symptoms of a learning bottleneck: 
“You just worry about the product. I’ll learn what we need to know.”
“Because the customers told me so!”
“I don’t have time to talk to people — I need to be coding!”
Avoiding bottlenecks has three parts: prepping, reviewing, and taking good
notes.
Prepping
Your most important preparation work is to ensure you know your current
list of 3 big questions. Figure them out with your team and make a point to
face the scary questions.
If you’ve already learned the facts of your customer and industry, then you
should also know what commitment and next steps you are going to push for
at the end of the meeting.
It’s easier to guide the conversation and stay on track if you have an existing
set of beliefs that you’re updating. Spend up to an hour writing down your
best guesses about what the person you’re about to talk to cares about and
wants. You’ll probably be wrong, but it’s easier to keep the discussion on
track and hit important points if you’ve created a skeleton. If you have an
appropriately focused segment, then you’ll only rarely need to do this. 
While prepping, if you come across a question which could be answered
with desk research, take a moment to do it. You want to move past the
obvious stuff and spend your conversations finding answers the internet
can’t give you.
Similarly, if you’re about to meet with a business, do your basic due
diligence on LinkedIn and the company website. It takes 5 minutes and will
100

--- page 100 ---
save you from borking the conversation and looking like an idiot. 
Sit down with your whole founding team when you prep. You want both
business and product to be represented. If you leave part of the company out
of the prep, then you end up missing their concerns in the customer
conversations.
Some founders react with hostility to the whole idea. They’ll say something
along the lines of, “We need to be building the gosh derned product, not
fuffing around talking to people.” On the surface, it appears to be a refusal
to face the reality that there might be something wrong with the product’s
foundations. But having seen it in several teams now, I think it’s actually the
desire for speed, where speed is measured by building features instead of
by de-risking and validating the business.
Beyond asking a grumpy cofounder to “humour me”, there are 2 questions to
help tease out hidden product risks. The first is asking, “If this company
fails, what is most likely to have killed it?” If we had asked that about my
very first product (a user-generated cartoon community), we would have
answered that either nobody wants to create cartoons or that their cartoons
will be so bad that nobody wants to watch them. This gives us a good
starting point to begin exploring with a combination of technical and
conversational tools.
Prep questions to unearth hidden risks:
If this company were to fail, why would it have happened?
What would have to be true for this to be a huge success?
The second question is a flipped version of the first, from Lafley/Martin’s
strategy book. “What would have to be true for this to be a huge success?”
In this case, I might have answered that we need lots of hilarious cartoons
plus scaling revenue from brand advertisers.
These aren’t long, involved strategy discussions. Your gut reaction is
enough. You don’t need to be too rigorous. All you’re really trying to figure
out is:
101

--- page 101 ---
“What do we want to learn from these guys?”
In fact, if you’re tight for time, asking this question is the only prep you
really need.
Rule of thumb: If you don’t know what you’re trying to learn, you shouldn’t
bother having the conversation.
102

--- page 102 ---
Reviewing
After a conversation, just review your notes with your team and update your
beliefs and 3 big questions as appropriate. 
The goal is to ensure the learning is now on paper and in everyone’s head
instead of just in yours. Talk through the key quotes and main takeaways of
the conversation, as well as any problems you ran into. 
I also like to talk about the meta-level of the conversation itself: which
questions worked and which didn’t? How can we do better next time? Were
there any important signals or questions we missed? This stuff is more craft
than science: you have to actively practice it to get better. It’s a valuable
skill for your team to have, so it’s worth spending a bit of time improving.
Just like prepping, reviewing is so simple that it sounds like a non-step. It’s
tempting to skip it. Don’t! The review is important. Disseminate learnings to
your team as quickly and as directly as possible, using notes and exact
quotes wherever you can. It keeps you in sync, leads to better decisions,
prevents arguments, and allows your whole team to benefit from the learning
you’ve worked so hard to acquire.
Who should show up
Everyone on the team who is making big decisions (including tech
decisions) needs to go to at least some of the meetings. The tech guys don’t
need to go to most of the meetings, but you’ll all learn a ton from hearing
customer reactions first-hand occasionally. You’ll also be able to help each
other catch and fix your conversation mistakes and biases.
Meetings go best when you've got two people at them. One person can focus
on taking notes and the other can focus on talking. As the second person,
sometimes you'll notice the lead asking bad questions or missing a signal
they should be digging into. Just jump in and fix them.
Don’t send more than two people unless it’s group-on-group or you’ve got a
particularly good reason to do so. Three folks interviewing someone can be
103

--- page 103 ---
a little overwhelming.
Going in solo is fine once you get good at taking concise notes. The main
problem of running solo is that it's harder to catch yourself and recover once
you start going off-track asking bad questions or missing the point.
If you’re shy and have no cofounder to take the lead, call in a favour with a
friend to come to your first couple conversations with you. You can just play
the role of the note-taker until you’re comfortable. If there’s no workaround
and you have to bite the bullet, remember that confidence is domain-
specific. Instead of suffering through, focus on getting better and
understanding the process. It will get less scary as you improve.
You can't outsource or hire someone to do customer learning. There are
exceptional team dynamics where it works, but generally speaking, the
founders need to be in the meetings themselves. When a hired gun brings you
bad news (“This problem isn't real and nobody cares about what we're
doing”), properly assimilating it is difficult.
More insidiously, if the signal is lukewarm, it’s tempting for a hire to gloss
over it. Hiring out your learning is a guaranteed way to get bad signals.
Until you've got a working business model and a repeatable sales or
marketing process, the founders need to be in the meetings themselves.
On the bright side, even though you have to be in the room to process the
learning, you don't necessarily have to be the one setting up or leading the
meetings. You can hire people to help as long as you’re there with them,
listening.
104

--- page 104 ---
How to write it down
Taking good notes is the best way to keep your team (and investors and
advisors) in the loop. Plus, notes make it harder to lie to yourself. And
when, months later, you decide to adjust the business's direction, you'll be
able to return to your notes instead of having to go do a whole new set of
interviews. 
When possible, write down exact quotes. Wrap them in quotation marks so
you know it's verbatim. You can later use them in your marketing language,
fundraising decks, and to resolve arguments with skeptical teammates. Other
times the exact quote isn't relevant and you just write down the big idea. 
In either case, add symbols to your notes as context and shorthand. I use 12
main symbols and make up more in the field as I need them. You probably
won't exactly copy mine, so don't worry about memorising them. You'll
build your own go-to list as you have more conversations.
:) :( :| ☇  ☐ ⤴ ^ ☑＄♀☆
Emotions
:) 
Excited
:(  
Angry
:| 
Embarrassed
Someone saying "that's a problem" should be interpreted totally differently
depending on whether they are neutral or outraged. Any strong emotion is
worth writing down. For example, depending on your industry, you might
also choose to make symbols for lust or laughter. Capture the big emotions
and remember to dig into them when they come up.
Their life
☇  Pain or problem (symbol is a lightning bolt)
 
Goal or job-to-be-done (symbol is a soccer/football goal)
☐  Obstacle
⤴ 
Workaround
^ 
Background or context (symbol is a distant mountain)
105

--- page 105 ---
These five “life” symbols are your bread and butter. Combine them with
emotion symbols where appropriate. Pains and obstacles carry a lot more
weight when someone is embarrassed or angry about them. 
Obstacles are preventing a customer from solving their problems even
though they want to. They're important because you'll probably also have to
deal with them. For example, a lot of corporate folks would love to use
cloud services and hate their current options, but can't use anything else
because their company's IT policy is an obstacle. Their workaround might
be to use their personal phone as a secondary computer or by doing certain
work at home. Also worth noting.
Specifics
☑  Feature request or purchasing criteria
＄ Money or budgets or purchasing process
♀  Mentioned a specific person or company
☆  Follow-up task
As we discussed, feature requests usually get ignored, but they're a good
signal to capture and explore. Must-have purchasing criteria are obviously
more important. Money signals are also key.
Write down specific names and companies. If it’s someone they know, ask
for an intro at the end of the conversation. If it’s a competitor or alternate
solution, write it down to research it later.
Put a big star on items to follow-up on after the meeting, especially next
steps you promised as a condition of their advancement/commitment.
Where to write it down
You want to take your customer notes so that they are:
Able to be sorted, mixed, and re-arranged
Able to be combined with the notes of the rest of your team
Permanent and retrievable
106

--- page 106 ---
Not mixed in with other random noise like todo lists and ideas
In practice, I’ve found that taking notes in my primary notebook is
practically useless. Over the course of several months’ sprawl, you set an
insurmountable search and retrieval task for yourself. If you won’t look at
your notes, they aren’t much good.
If you do end up taking notes in non-ideal places, you just need to spend a
little extra post-meeting time moving them over into your permanent format.
Otherwise you’ll be kicking yourself when you remember that amazing
quote someone gave you which you can’t quite remember well enough to
convince those skeptical investors.
What is a better note-taking medium?
Google Docs spreadsheets and Evernote are both great for team sharing,
search, and retrieval. Spreadsheets are wonderfully sortable if you write
your key signals in their own column. The downside is that it comes across
as rude to take notes directly on a computer during a meeting, so you add a
bit of mandatory post-meeting work to transfer your notes. I always found
this a bit annoying, but it’s way better than losing your learning in an off-
topic notebook.
A dedicated notebook is fine, if you can remember to carry it with you and
use it. For a while, I would use my regular notebook for my customer notes
and then just tear out every page which wasn’t from an interview so it was
easier to find them later. Hardly the most elegant.
My favourite medium is index cards. Post-it notes also work. I carry around
blank cards and take notes on them, with one quote or learning per card
(along with a signal icon, of course). After the meeting I jot down the date
and name of the person on each card. It takes a couple minutes, but it’s faster
than moving over all your notes. When we review, we lay the cards out on
the table and sort through them. Cards are great because of the random
access and sorting. If you learn that the problem you’re solving doesn’t
really matter, you can just pull out all the cards marked with a lightning bolt
and find yourself a new problem that’s already been confirmed.
When I first started, I would make audio recordings, but that suffered from
107

--- page 107 ---
the same problem as notebooks. I'd end up with a ton of content and no real
way to sort it or find the bit I wanted, so I ended up ignoring the recordings.
If you do want to use audio, you’ll find people are surprisingly willing to be
recorded. Put your phone on the table as you sit down and say, “Hey, is it
cool if I record this, because I’m always paranoid I’ll miss something
important in my notes. It won’t get shared with anyone or posted anywhere.”
Almost everyone says yes, but it does blow your cover if you’re trying to
Keep it Casual.
If you embrace Keeping it Casual, you'll find customer conversations
appearing out of nowhere and catching you by surprise. Just go with it. I've
got notes written on paper plates from a pizza party, on beer mats from the
pub, and on newspapers from the cafe. You'll want to transfer them over to
your main storage system once you get back to the office, but it's better to
capture what's said on something weird than to try to remember all the
important bits.
If it’s totally inappropriate to take notes during the chat, just have the
conversation and then immediately retreat to a corner to write down what
was said. This is how I usually handle customer conversations at the pub or
conferences.
Regardless of the medium, the most important thing is that the notes are
lightweight enough that you'll actually review them yourself and with your
team. 
Rule of thumb: Notes are useless if you don't look at them.
The process
Talking to customers is a tool, not an obligation. If it’s not going to help or
you don’t want to do it for whatever reason, just skip it. I’m sure you’ve
been on the receiving end of a half-assed survey sent out by some new
startup to tick the box marked “learn from customers” on their startup todo
list. There are better ways to waste your time.
Without figuring out what actually matters to your company and how to deal
with it effectively, you’re just going through the motions. 
108

--- page 108 ---
When it comes to conversations, it looks like this:
Signs you’re just going through the motions:
You’re talking more than they are
They are complimenting you or your idea
You told them about your idea and don’t know what’s happening next
You don’t have notes
You haven’t looked through your notes with your team
You got an unexpected answer and it didn’t change your idea
You weren’t scared of any of the questions you asked
You aren’t sure which big question you’re trying to answer by doing
this
The persistent presence of any of these problems suggests that you’re doing
something wrong and wasting your time.
Here are the steps I go through to keep on track. Feel free to ignore or tweak
as needed given your situation and company. It’s as light-weight as I’ve
been able to get it and should reduce rather than increase the amount of time
you need to spend on conversations.
The process before a batch of conversations:
If you haven’t yet, choose a focused, findable segment
With your team, decide your big 3 learning goals
If relevant, decide on ideal next steps and commitments
If conversations are the right tool, figure out who to talk to
Create a series of best guesses about what the person cares about
If a question could be answered via desk research, do that first
During the conversation:
Frame the conversation
Keep it casual
109

--- page 109 ---
Ask good questions which pass The Mom Test
Deflect compliments, anchor fluff, and dig beneath signals
Take good notes
If relevant, press for commitment and next steps
After a batch of conversations:
With your team, review your notes and key customer quotes
If relevant, transfer notes into permanent storage
Update your beliefs and plans
Decide on the next 3 big questions
The goal of this process is twofold. Firstly, to make sure you're spending
your time well by attacking the questions which really matter and using the
whole founding team’s brains. Secondly, to spread any new learning through
your team as quickly and completely as possible.
There you go. Now you know everything I do about how to learn from
conversations. Combine this process with The Mom Test, Keeping it
Casual, and Advancement for maximum learning in minimum time. But even
if it goes wrong, don’t worry so much. Eternity will forgive.
This stuff is fast
The time scales of the process are important. The point is to make your
business move faster, not slower. 
Don’t spend a week prepping for meetings; spend an hour and then go talk to
people. Anything more is stalling. 
Don’t spend months doing full-time customer conversations before
beginning to move on a product. Spend a week, maybe two. Get your
bearings and then give them something to commit to.
You’ll keep talking to customers for the life of your company, of course. I’m
not advising you to become a recluse after the first two weeks. Your
110

--- page 110 ---
customers are a crucial source of ongoing insight and will help catch any
badgers in the bush, so to speak. With the tools in this book (especially
Keeping it Casual) you should be able to keep benefitting from customer
learning without spending any real time on it. You can do it alongside
growing your business rather than in place of it. 
This stuff moves really quickly when you’re doing it right. This book isn’t
meant you an excuse to squander precious months on theorising. It’s meant to
help you extract maximum value in minimum time from conversations so you
can get back to what really matters: building your business.
Rule of thumb: Go build your dang company already.
111