# Chapter 1: The Mom Test
book: TheMomTest
pages: 7-22
section_id: chapter-1

--- page 7 ---
CHAPTER ONE
The Mom Test
People say you shouldn’t ask your mom whether your business is a good
idea. That’s technically true, but it misses the point. You shouldn’t ask
anyone whether your business is a good idea. At least not in those words.
Your mom will lie to you the most (just ‘cuz she loves you), but it’s a bad
question and invites everyone to lie to you at least a little. 
It’s not anyone else’s responsibility to show us the truth. It’s our
responsibility to find it. We do that by asking good questions.
The Mom Test is a set of simple rules for crafting good questions that even
your mom can't lie to you about. 
Before we get there, let's look at two conversations with mom and see what
we can learn about our business idea: digital cookbooks for the iPad.
8

--- page 8 ---
Failing the mom test
Son: “Mom, mom, I have an idea for a business — can I run it by
you?” I am about to expose my ego — please don’t hurt my
feelings.
Mom: “Of course, dear.” You are my only son and I am ready to lie
to protect you.
Son: “You like your iPad, right? You use it a lot?” 
Mom: “Yes.” You led me to this answer, so here you go.
Son: “Okay, so would you ever buy an app which was like a
cookbook for your iPad?” I am optimistically asking a
hypothetical question and you know what I want you to say.
Mom: “Hmmm.” As if I need another cookbook at my age.
Son: “And it only costs $40 — that’s cheaper than those
hardcovers on your shelf.” I’m going to skip that lukewarm
signal and tell you more about my great idea.
Mom: “Well...” Aren’t apps supposed to cost a dollar?
Son: “And you can share recipes with your friends, and there’s an
iPhone app which is your shopping list. And videos of that
celebrity chef you love.” Please just say “yes.” I will not leave
you alone until you do.
Mom: “Oh, well yes honey, that sounds amazing. And you’re right,
$40 is a good deal. Will it have pictures of the recipes?” I have
rationalised the price outside of a real purchase decision, made
a non-committal compliment, and offered a feature request to
appear engaged.
Son: “Yes, definitely. Thanks mom — love you!” I have
completely mis-interpreted this conversation and taken it as
validation.
9

--- page 9 ---
Mom: “Won’t you have some lasagna?” I am concerned that you
won’t be able to afford food soon. Please eat something.
Our misguided entrepreneur has a few more conversations like this,
becomes increasingly convinced he’s right, quits his job, and sinks his
savings into the app. Then he wonders why nobody (even his mom) buys the
app, especially since he had been so rigorous.
Doing it wrong is worse than doing nothing at all. When you know you’re
clueless, you tend to be careful. But collecting a fistful of false positives is
like convincing a drunk he’s sober: not an improvement.
Let’s fix the conversation and show that if we do it right, even mom can help
us figure out whether our business is a good idea.
Passing the mom test
Son: “Hey mom, how’s that new iPad treating you?”
Mom: “Oh - I love it! I use it every day.”
Son: “What do you usually do on it?” Whoops — we asked a
generic question, so answer to this probably won’t be terribly
valuable.
Mom: “Oh, you know. Read the news, play sudoku, catch up with
my friends. The usual.”
Son: “What’s the last thing you did on it?” Get specific about
examples in the past to get real, concrete data.
Mom: “You know your father and I are planning that trip? I was
figuring out where we could stay. “ She uses it for both
entertainment and utility, which didn’t come up during the
“usually” answer.
Son: “Did you use an app for that?” A slightly leading question,
but sometimes we need to nudge to get to the topic we’re
10

--- page 10 ---
interested in.
Mom: “No, I just used Google. I didn’t know there was an app.
What’s it called?” Younger folks use the App Store as a search
engine, whereas your mom waits for a specific
recommendation. If that’s true more broadly, finding a reliable
marketing channel outside the App Store is going to be crucial.
Son: “Where did you find out about the other ones you use?” Dig
into interesting and unexpected answers to understand the
behaviours and motivations behind them.
Mom: “The Sunday paper has a section on the apps of the week.”
You can’t remember the last time you cracked open a paper, but
it sounds like traditional PR might be a viable option for
reaching customers like your mom.
Son: “Makes sense. Hey, by the way, I saw a couple new
cookbooks on the shelf — where did those come from?”
Business ideas usually have several failure points. Here it’s
both the medium of an iPad app and the content of a cookbook.
Mom: “They’re one of those things you just end up getting at
Christmas. I think Marcy gave me that one. Haven’t even
opened it. As if I need another lasagna recipe at my age!” Aha!
This answer is gold dust for 3 reasons: 1. Old people don’t
need another generic set of recipes. 2. The gift market may be
strong . 3. Younger cooks may be a better customer segment
since they don’t yet know the basics. 
Son: “What’s the last cookbook you did buy for yourself?” Attack
generic answers like “I don’t buy cookbooks” by asking for
specific examples.
Mom: “Now that you mention it, I bought a vegan cookbook about 3
months ago. Your father is trying to eat healthier and thought my
veggies could benefit from a pinch more zazz.” More gold:
experienced chefs may still buy specialised or niche
cookbooks.
11

--- page 11 ---
The conversation continues. If it’s going well, I would raise the topics of
whether she ever thought to look for recipes on the iPad or for cooking
videos on YouTube. 
Overall, your mom can’t remember the last time she had such an enjoyable
conversation with you. You were so interested in her life for once! You
thank her for the lasagna, pet the dog, and head home. You’ve learned that
building an app and waiting for people to find it on the App Store probably
isn’t a good plan. But you’ve got some good insight about your customer
segment and a few promising leads to look into. That was a useful
conversation.
A useful conversation
The measure of usefulness of an early customer conversation is whether it
gives us concrete facts about our customers' lives and world views. These
facts, in turn, allow us to improve our business.
Our original idea looked like this: old people like cookbooks and iPads.
Therefore, we will build a cookbook for the iPad. It’s generic. There are a
thousand possible variations of this premise. 
With an idea this vague, we can’t answer any of the difficult questions like
which recipes to include or how people will hear about it. Until we get
specific, it always seems like a good idea.
After just one conversation (with our mom, of all people), we have a higher
fidelity vision. We now see that there are at least 2 specific customer
segments we might serve, each of which needs a slightly different product.
We’ve also identified some major risks to address before we commit too
heavily.
1. We could offer niche recipes (ethnic, diets) which experienced cooks
may not already know. Our biggest question is how to reach them when
they don’t search for apps. We have a possible lead with newspaper
and magazine PR. 
2. Alternately, we might make generic recipes for younger cooks who are
easier to reach via the App Store and who haven’t memorised all their
12

--- page 12 ---
favourites yet. We haven’t talked to any, so we have loads of questions,
but one big one is whether a customer segment who isn’t already in the
habit of buying expensive cookbooks will pay a premium for ours.
The first conversation gave us rope to hang ourselves. The second gave us
actionable insight. Why? What was different about the second conversation?
Mom was unable to lie to us because we never talked about our idea.
That’s kind of weird, right? We find out if people care about what we’re
doing by never mentioning it. Instead, we talk about them and their lives. 
The point is a bit more subtle than this. Eventually you do need to mention
what you’re building and take people’s money for it. However, the big
mistake is almost always to mention your idea too soon rather than too late. 
If you just avoid mentioning your idea, you automatically start asking better
questions. Doing this is the easiest (and biggest) improvement you can make
to your customer conversations.
Here are 3 simple rules to help you. They are collectively called (drumroll)
The Mom Test:
The Mom Test:
1. Talk about their life instead of your idea
2. Ask about specifics in the past instead of generics or opinions about
the future
3. Talk less and listen more
It’s called The Mom Test because it leads to questions that even your mom
can’t lie to you about. When you do it right, they won’t even know you have
an idea. There are some other important tools and tricks that we’ll introduce
throughout the rest of the book. But first, let’s let’s put The Mom Test to
work on some questions.
Rule of thumb: Customer conversations are bad by default. It’s your job to
13

--- page 13 ---
fix them.
14

--- page 14 ---
Good question / bad question
   
Let’s play a game. Are the following questions good or bad? Do they pass
or fail The Mom Test? If they fail it, why? And how could we improve
them? Work your way through the list and then read on for some discussion.
“Do you think it’s a good idea?”
“Would you buy a product which did X?”
“How much would you pay for X?”
“What would your dream product do?”
“Why do you bother?”
“What are the implications of that?”
“Talk me through the last time that happened.”
“Talk me through your workflow.”
“What else have you tried?”
“Would you pay X for a product which did Y?”
“How are you dealing with it now?”
“Where does the money come from?”
“Who else should I talk to?”
“Is there anything else I should have asked?”
15

--- page 15 ---
"Do you think it's a good idea?"
Awful question! Here’s the thing: only the market can tell if your idea is
good. Everything else is just opinion. Unless you’re talking to a deep
industry expert, this is self-indulgent noise with a high risk of false
positives.
Let’s fix it: Say you’re building an app to help construction companies
manage their suppliers. You might ask them to show you how they currently
do it. Talk about which parts they love and hate. Ask which other tools and
processes they tried before settling on this one. Are they actively searching
for a replacement? If so, what’s the sticking point? If not, why not? Where
are they losing money with their current tools? Is there a budget for better
ones? Now, take all that information and decide for yourself whether it’s a
good idea. 
Rule of thumb: Opinions are worthless.
"Would you buy a product which did X?"
Bad question. You’re asking for opinions and hypotheticals from overly
optimistic people who want to make you happy. The answer to a question
like this is almost always “yes”, which makes it worthless.
Let’s fix it: Ask how they currently solve X and how much it costs them to
do so. And how much time it takes. Ask them to talk you through what
happened the last time X came up. If they haven’t solved the problem, ask
why not. Have they tried searching for solutions and found them wanting?
Or do they not even care enough to have Googled for it?
Rule of thumb: Anything involving the future is an over-optimistic lie.
"How much would you pay for X?"
Bad question. This is exactly as bad as the last one, except it’s more likely
to trick you because the number makes it feel rigorous and truthy.
How to fix it: Just like the others, fix it by asking about their life as it
16

--- page 16 ---
already is. How much does the problem cost them? How much do they
currently pay to solve it? How big is the budget they’ve allocated? I hope
you’re noticing a trend here.
Rule of thumb: People will lie to you if they think it’s what you want to hear.
"What would your dream product do?"
Sort-of-okay question, but only if you ask good follow-ups. Otherwise it’s a
bad question. A question like this is like the “set” before the spike in a
volleyball game: not too helpful on its own, but it puts you in a good
position as long as you’re ready to exploit it.
Let’s improve it: The value comes from understanding why they want these
features. You don’t want to just collect feature requests. You aren’t building
the product by committee. But the motivations and constraints behind those
requests are critical.
Rule of thumb: People know what their problems are, but they don’t know
how to solve those problems.
"Why do you bother?"
Good question. I love this sort of question. It’s great for getting from the
perceived problem to the real one. 
For example, some founders I knew were talking to finance guys spending
hours each day sending emails about their spreadsheets. The finance guys
were asking for better messaging tools so they could save time. The “why
do you bother” question led to “so we can be certain that we’re all working
off the latest version.” Aha. The solution ended up being less like the
requested messaging tool and more like Dropbox. A question like “why do
you bother” points toward their motivations. It gives you the why. 
Rule of thumb: You're shooting blind until you understand their goals.
"What are the implications of that?"
17

--- page 17 ---
Good question. This distinguishes between I-will-pay-to-solve-that
problems and thats-kind-of-annoying-but-I-can-deal-with-it “problems”.
Some problems have big, costly implications. Others exist but don’t actually
matter. It behooves you to find out which is which. It also gives you a good
pricing signal.
I once had someone keep describing the workflow we were fixing with
emotionally loaded terms like “DISASTER”, accompanied by much yelling
and arm waving. But when I asked him what the implications were, he sort
of shrugged and said “Oh, we just ended up throwing a bunch of interns at
the problem—it’s actually working pretty well.”
Rule of thumb: Some problems don’t actually matter.
"Talk me through the last time that happened."
Good question. Your high school writing teacher may have told you that
good stories are meant to “show, not tell”. Whenever possible, you want to
be shown, not told by your customers. Learn through their actions instead of
their opinions. If you ran a burger joint, it would be stupid to survey your
customers about whether they prefer cheeseburgers or hamburgers. Just
watch what they buy (but if you’re trying to understand why they prefer one
over the other, you’ll have to talk to them).
Folks can’t be wishy-washy when you’re watching them do the task in
question. Get as close to the real action as you can. Seeing it first hand can
provide unique insight into murky situations. But if you can’t get in there,
asking them to talk you through the last time it happened still offers many of
the benefits. 
Being walked through their full workflow answers many questions in one
fell swoop: how do they spend their days, what tools do they use, and who
do they talk to? What are the constraints of their day and life? How does
your product fit into that day? Which other tools, products, software, and
tasks does your product need to integrate with?
Rule of thumb: Watching someone do a task will show you where the
problems and inefficiencies really are, not where the customer thinks they
are.
18

--- page 18 ---
"What else have you tried?"
Good question. What are they using now? How much does it cost and what
do they love and hate about it? How much would those fixes be worth and
how big of a pain would it be for them to switch to a new solution?
I was checking out an idea with a potential customer and they excitedly said,
“Oh man, that happens all the time. I would definitely pay for something
which solved that problem.” 
That’s a future-promise statement without any commitment to back it up, so I
needed to learn whether it was true or not. I asked, “When’s the last time
this came up?” Turns out, it was pretty recent. That’s a great sign. To dig
further, I asked, “Can you talk me through how you tried to fix it?” He
looked at me blankly, so I nudged him further. 
“Did you google around for any other ways to solve it?” He seemed a little
bit like he’d been caught stealing from the cookie jar and said, “No… I
didn’t really think to. It’s something I’m used to dealing with, you know?” 
In the abstract, it’s something he would “definitely” pay to solve. Once we
got specific, he didn't even care enough to search for a solution (which do
exist, incidentally).
It’s easy to get someone emotional about a problem if you lead them there.
“Don’t you hate when your shoelaces come untied while you’re carrying
groceries?” “Yeah, that’s the worst!” And then I go off and design my
special never-come-untied laces without realising that if you actually cared,
you would already be using a double-knot. 
Rule of thumb: If they haven't looked for ways of solving it already, they're
not going to look for (or buy) yours.
"Would you pay X for a product which did Y?"
Bad question. The fact that you’ve added a number doesn’t help. This is bad
for the same reasons as the others: people are overly optimistic about what
they would do and want to make you happy. Plus, it’s about your idea
19

--- page 19 ---
instead of their life.
Let’s fix it: As always, ask about what they currently do now, not what they
believe they might do in the future. Common wisdom is that you price your
product in terms of value to the customer rather than cost to you. That's true.
And you can't quantify the value received without prodding their financial
worldview.
Another way to fix it, if you’re far enough along, is to literally ask for
money. If you have the deposit or pre-order in hand, you know they were
telling the truth.
"How are you dealing with it now?"
Good question. Beyond workflow information, this gives you a price
anchor. If they’re paying £100/month for a duct-tape workaround, you know
which ballpark you're playing in. On the other hand, they may have spent
£120,000 this year on agency fees to maintain a site you're replacing. If
that's the case, you don't want to be having the £100 conversation.
Sometimes, both of the above will be happening simultaneously and you get
to choose how you present yourself. Do you want to be a replacement for
the web app at a yearly value of £1.2k or for the agency at 100x that?
Rule of thumb: While it’s rare for someone to tell you precisely what they’ll
pay you, they’ll often show you what it’s worth to them.
"Where does the money come from?"
Good question. This isn't something you would necessarily ask a consumer
(though you might), but in a B2B context it’s a must-ask. It leads to a
conversation about whose budget the purchase will come from and who else
within their company holds the power to torpedo the deal. 
Often, you'll find yourself talking to someone other than the budget owner.
Your future pitches will hit unseen snags unless you learn who else matters
and what they care about. This knowledge of their purchasing process will
eventually turn into a repeatable sales roadmap.
20

--- page 20 ---
21

--- page 21 ---
"Who else should I talk to?"
Good question. Yes! End every conversation like this. Lining up the first
few conversations can be challenging, but if you’re onto something
interesting and treating people well, your leads will quickly multiply via
intros. 
If someone doesn’t want to make intros, that’s cool too. Just leave them be.
You’ve learned that you’re either screwing up the meeting (probably by
being too formal, pitchy, or clingy) or they don’t actually care about the
problem you’re solving. Take anything nice they say with an extra grain of
salt.
"Is there anything else I should have asked?"
Good question. Usually, by the end of the meeting, people understand what
you’re trying to do. Since you don’t know the industry, they’ll often be
sitting there quietly while you completely miss the most important point.
Asking this question gives them a chance to politely “fix” your line of
questioning. And they will!
This question is a bit of a crutch: you’ll discard it as you get better at asking
good questions and as you get to know the industry.
Rule of thumb: People want to help you, but will rarely do so unless you
give them an excuse to do so.
22

--- page 22 ---
Using the mom test
You’ll notice that none of the good questions were about asking what you
should build. One of the recurring “criticisms” about talking to customers is
that you’re abdicating your creative vision and building your product by
committee. Given that people don’t know what they want, that wouldn’t be a
terribly effective approach. Deciding what to build is your job.
The questions to ask are about your customers’ lives: their problems, cares,
constraints, and goals. You humbly and honestly gather as much information
about them as you can and then take your own visionary leap to a solution.
Once you’ve taken the leap, you confirm that it’s correct (and refine it)
through Commitment & Advancement, which we’ll look at in Chapter 5.
It boils down to this: you aren’t allowed to tell them what their problem is,
and in return, they aren’t allowed to tell you what to build. They own the
problem, you own the solution. 
Before we move look at ways to confirm that you’re building the right
product to fit your customers’ lives, we’re going to look at fixing some of
the ways conversations go wrong.
23