# Conclusion and Cheatsheet
book: TheMomTest
pages: 111-118
section_id: conclusion

--- page 111 ---
Conclusion and
cheatsheet
I still ask dumb questions all the time. You will too. Don’t beat yourself up
over it. In fact, just yesterday I screwed up a particularly important meeting
by slipping into pitch mode (this was yesterday at the time of writing…
hopefully not again at the time of reading).
It happens. It’s okay. Review with your team, don’t beat yourself up (or your
cofounders) over mistakes. Work on getting better as a team.
I make tons of mistakes. At least now I notice and have a chance to fix them.
Most bad conversations can be fixed. You’re trying to do something
difficult. You’re never going to be perfect, but it always helps to be better.
People love startups. Startups do cool stuff and make their lives better.
Everyone supports the entrepreneur. When entrepreneurs screw up, people
want to forgive them. They want the entrepreneur and the startup to
succeed. 
By asking good questions, we can fix many flawed ideas before they get us
in trouble. But still, sometimes it doesn’t work out. It’s okay. Go to the
people who believed in and supported you and thank them. If relevant,
apologise. They’ll say something like:
“Hey, don’t even worry about it — I know how it goes.”
Eternity will forgive our earthly blunders. Everyone loves an entrepreneur.
112

--- page 112 ---
After all, you’re putting it on the line to try and make their lives better.
Rule of thumb: It’s going to be okay.
Hack it
In ancient times it was prophesied that whoever undid the convoluted
Gordian Knot would rule the land. Coming across the knot, Alexander drew
his sword and with a single stroke, cut the knot in half. The knot was undone
and he became “the Great”.
Struggling to untie the knot was the “proper” process. Cutting through it was
a hack (ba-dum tish!). Alexander jumped straight to the end result without
any of the work. 
When we find a new and exciting process, it’s easy to spend hours
obsessively geeking out about exactly the right way to untie this big, gnarly
knot.
At a workshop about customer segmentation, a personal trainer said he was
spending most of his time on the non-billable commutes between his clients.
At some point it was suggested that the police might be a better customer,
since he could go to the station and spend all day working with different
officers. No commute, more billable hours, and a less price-sensitive
customer. Sounds good in theory.
We all started geeking out about how he was going to validate this. Who
could he talk to? Did anyone have family in the police? What should his
interview questions be? What was the market size? Etc etc. 
He looked at us like we were all idiots and held up his phone. “Why
wouldn’t I just call them?” It’s not like he didn’t know their number. We all
stood around a bit dumbfounded while he went outside and called the
police. Twenty minutes later, he came back in with a trial session
scheduled. 
Having a process is valuable, but don’t get stuck in it. Sometimes you can
just pick up the phone and hack through the knot.
113

--- page 113 ---
114

--- page 114 ---
Cheatsheet
Just in case you like lists.
Key skills:
Asking good questions (Chapters 1 & 3)
Avoiding bad data (Chapter 2)
Keeping it casual (Chapter 4)
Pushing for commitment & advancement (Chapter 5)
Framing the meeting (Chapter 6)
Customer segmentation (Chapter 7)
Prepping & reviewing (Chapter 8)
Taking notes (Chapter 8)
The Mom Test:
1. Talk about their life instead of your idea
2. Ask about specifics in the past instead of generics or opinions about
the future
3. Talk less and listen more
Getting back on track (avoiding bad data):
Deflect compliments 
Anchor fluff
Dig beneath opinions, ideas, requests, and emotions
Mistakes and symptoms:
1. Fishing for compliments
115

--- page 115 ---
“I’m thinking of starting a business... so, do you think it will work?”
“I had an awesome idea for an app — do you like it?”
1. Exposing your ego (aka The Pathos Problem)
 
“So here’s that top-secret project I quit my job for... what do you
think?”
“I can take it — be honest and tell me what you really think!”
1. Being pitchy
“No no, I don’t think you get it...”
“Yes, but it also does this!”
1. Being too formal
“So, first off, thanks for agreeing to this interview. I just have a few
questions for you and then I’ll let you get back to your day…”
“On a scale of 1 to 5, how much would you say you…”
“Let’s set up a meeting.”
1. Being a learning bottleneck
“You just worry about the product. I’ll learn what we need to know.”
“Because the customers told me so!”
“I don’t have time to talk to people — I need to be coding!
116

--- page 116 ---
1. Collecting compliments instead of facts and commitments
“We’re getting a lot of positive feedback.”
“Everybody I’ve talked to loves the idea.”
The process before, during and after the meeting:
If you haven’t yet, choose a focused, findable segment
With your team, decide your big 3 learning goals
If relevant, decide on ideal next steps and commitments
If conversations are the right tool, figure out who to talk to
Create a series of best guesses about what the person cares about
If a question could be answered via desk research, do that first
Frame the conversation
Keep it casual
Ask good questions which pass The Mom Test
Deflect compliments, anchor fluff, and dig beneath signals
Take good notes
If relevant, press for commitment and next steps
With your team, review your notes and key customer quotes
If relevant, transfer notes into permanent storage
Update your beliefs and plans
Decide on the next 3 big questions
Results of a good meeting:
Facts — concrete, specific facts about what they do and why they do it
117

--- page 117 ---
(as opposed to the bad data of compliments, fluff, and opinions)
Commitment — They are showing they’re serious by giving up
something they value such as meaningful amounts of time, reputational
risk, or money. 
Advancement — They are moving to the next step of your real-world
funnel and getting closer to a sale.
Signs you’re just going through the motions:
You’re talking more than they are
They are complimenting you or your idea
You told them about your idea and don’t know what’s happening next
You don’t have notes
You haven’t looked through your notes with your team
You got an unexpected answer and it didn’t change your idea
You weren’t scared of any of the questions you asked
You aren’t sure which big question you’re trying to answer by doing
this
You aren’t sure why you’re having the meeting
Writing it down — signal symbols:
:) 
Excited
:(  
Angry
:| 
Embarrassed
☇  Pain or problem (symbol is a lightning bolt)
 
Goal or job-to-be-done (symbol is a soccer/football goal)
☐  Obstacle
⤴ 
Workaround
^ 
Background or context (symbol is a distant mountain)
☑  Feature request or purchasing criteria
＄ Money or budgets or purchasing process
♀  Mentioned a specific person or company
☆  Follow-up task
Signs you aren’t pushing for commitment and advancement:
118

--- page 118 ---
A pipeline of zombie leads
Ending product meetings with a compliment
Ending product meetings with no clear next steps
Meetings which "went well"
They haven't given up anything of value
Asking for and framing the meeting:
Vision — half-sentence version of how you’re making the world better
Framing — where you’re at and what you’re looking for
Weakness — show how you can be helped
Pedestal — show that they, in particular, can provide that help
Ask — ask for help
The big prep question:
“What do we want to learn from these guys?”
119