# Introduction
book: TheMomTest
pages: 2-6
section_id: introduction

--- page 2 ---
Introduction
Trying to learn from customer conversations is like excavating a delicate
archaeological site. The truth is down there somewhere, but it’s fragile.
While each blow with your shovel gets you closer to the truth, you’re liable
to smash it into a million little pieces if you use too blunt an instrument.
I see a lot of teams using a bulldozer and crate of dynamite for their
excavation. They are, in one way or another, forcing people to say
something nice about their business. They use heavy-handed questions like
“do you think it’s a good idea” and shatter their prize.
At the other end of the spectrum, some founders are using a toothbrush to
unearth a city, flinching away from digging deep and finding out whether
anything of value is actually buried down there.
We want to find the truth of how to make our business succeed. We need to
dig for it—and dig deep—but every question we ask carries the very real
possibility of biasing the person we’re talking to and rendering the whole
exercise pointless. It happens more than you’d ever imagine.
The truth is our goal and questions are our tools. But we must learn to wield
them. It’s delicate work. And well worth learning. There’s treasure below.
3

--- page 3 ---
Is this book for you?
Hello,
You’ve read about Customer Development or Lean Startup and aren’t sure
how to actually go about having your first customer conversation.
You’re a traditional business or sales person aiming to be more effective
within a young company which hasn’t yet found its business model.
You mentor, support, or invest in startups and want to help them have more
useful customer conversations.
You’ve fallen in love with a new business idea and want to figure out if it
has legs before quitting your job.
You’re raising funding and the investors want to see more evidence that
you’re solving a real problem.
You find this whole process incredibly awkward and really wish there was
an easier way to do it.
You’ve got a vague sense of an opportunity and want to figure out exactly
what it is.
You’ve always wanted to build your own company and want to start making
real progress today.
This book is for you.
4

--- page 4 ---
Talking to customers is hard
We know we ought to talk to customers. Many of us even do talk to
customers. But we still end up building stuff nobody buys. Isn’t that exactly
what talking to people is meant to prevent?
It turns out almost all of us are doing it wrong. I’ve made these mistakes
myself and seen them happen a hundred times over with other founders.
Despite the recent explosion of startup knowledge, the process of figuring
out what customers want too often unfolds as it did at my first company,
Habit.
We were building social advertising tech and I was distraught. We'd spent 3
years working our hearts out. We’d nearly run out of investor money and it
didn’t look like we’d be getting more. We’d relocated internationally to be
closer to our market and had survived a co-founder being deported. I’d been
talking to customers full-time for months. And then, after innumerable days
of slog and an exhausted team, I learned I’d been doing it wrong. I may as
well not have bothered.
The advice that you ought to be talking to your customers is well-
intentioned, but ultimately a bit unhelpful. It’s like the popular kid advising
his nerdy friend to “just be cooler.” They forget to mention that it’s hard. 
These conversations take time, are easy to screw up and go wrong in a
nefarious way. Bad customer conversations aren’t just useless. Worse, they
convince you that you’re on the right path. They give you a false positive
which causes you to over-invest your cash, your time, and your team. Even
when you’re not actively screwing something up, those pesky customers
seem hellbent on lying to you.
This book is a practical how-to. The approach and tools within are gathered
from a wide range of communities including Customer Development, Design
Thinking, Lean Startup, User Experience, traditional sales and more. It’s
based on working with a bunch of founders and from my experiences both
failing and succeeding at customer learning, as well as from the support of
innumerable peers and mentors.
It’s a casual approach to conversation, based on chipping away the
5

--- page 5 ---
formality and awkwardness of talking to people and taking responsibility
for asking good questions.
Why another book on talking and selling?
   
Does your shelf really need another book on selling and talking? And does it
need one written by me in particular? 
Well… yes. Yes it does. 
Here’s why:
Firstly, I’m a techie, not a sales guy. I’m introverted and naturally bad in
meetings. Every other sales book I've read is written by and for folks who
are already pretty good at dealing with people. They know the unspoken
rules of the meeting. I fumbled through from scratch. You know that line,
“Don’t call me, I’ll call you”? People have actually said that to me (and I
believed them). With much help from peers and advisors, I eventually
started figuring it out and we closed deals with companies like Sony and
MTV. But I learned that there’s a big gap between textbooks and check
books.
Secondly, before we can start doing things correctly, we need to understand
how we’re doing them wrong. Through my own projects and my work with
new founders, I’ve built up an exhaustive list of how it can go wrong.
Throughout the book, I’ll try to help you figure out where you might be
messing stuff up in unnoticed ways.
Finally, this is a practical handbook, not a theoretical tome. For example,
how do you find people to talk to and set up the meetings? How do you take
notes while still being polite and paying attention? It’s all in here. 
I can’t teach you how to make your business huge. That’s up to you. But I
can give you the tools to talk to customers, navigate the noise, and learn
what they really want. The saddest thing that can happen to a startup is for
nobody to care when it disappears. We’re going to make sure that doesn’t
happen.
A note on scope & terminology
6

--- page 6 ---
This book isn’t a summary or description or re-interpretation of the process
of Customer Development. That’s a bigger concept and something Steve
Blank has covered comprehensively in 4 Steps to the E.piphany and The
Startup Owner’s Manual. 
This book is specifically about how to properly talk to customers and learn
from them. Talking is one of the big aspects of Customer Development, but
shouldn't be confused with the whole process. To keep the distinction clear,
I’m going to refer to chatting with people as “customer conversation”
(lowercase) instead of “Customer Development” (uppercase). 
For the most part, I'm assuming you already agree that talking to customers
is a good idea. I’m not trying to convince you again, so this book is more
“how” than “why”.
Let’s get involved.
7