# Chapter 7: The Turn-Key Revolution
book: TheEMythRevisited
pages: 66-74
section_id: chapter-7

--- page 66 ---
7
THE TURN-KEY REVOLUTION
Systems theory looks at the world in terms of the interrelatedness of
all phenomena, and in this framework an integrated whole whose
properties cannot be reduced to those of its parts is called a system.
Fritjof Capra
The Turning Point
The Industrial Revolution, the Technological Revolution, the Information
Explosion are all familiar phenomena in today’s world. There is no question
of the impact each has had on our lives.
If asked to describe the Turn-Key Revolution, however, most people
would simply respond with a blank stare.
Yet the impact of the Turn-Key Revolution on American small business,
and the inferences we can draw about that impact for the future, are as
profound as any of the phenomena cited above.
For at the heart of the Turn-Key Revolution is a way of doing business
that has the power to dramatically transform any small business—indeed, any
business, no matter what its size—from a condition of chaos and disease to a
condition of order, excitement, and continuous growth. It is the Turn-Key
Revolution that provides us with that illusive key to the development of an
extraordinary business: the ultimately balanced model of a business that
works.

--- page 67 ---
The Franchise Phenomenon
It all started in 1952 when a fifty-two-year-old salesman walked into a
hamburger stand in San Bernardino, California, to sell the two brothers who
owned it a milkshake machine.
What he saw there was a miracle.
At least that’s how Ray Kroc, the milkshake machine salesman, might
have described it. For he had never seen anything like that very first
MacDonald’s (later to become McDonald’s) hamburger stand.
It worked like a Swiss watch!
Hamburgers were produced in a way he’d never seen before—quickly,
efficiently, inexpensively, and identically.
Best of all, anyone could do it.
He watched high school kids working with precision under the
supervision of the owners, happily responding to the long lines of customers
queued up in front of the stand.
It became apparent to Ray Kroc that what the MacDonald brothers had
created was not just another hamburger stand but a money machine!
Soon after that first visit, and possessed by a passion he had never felt
quite like that before, Ray Kroc convinced Mac and Jim MacDonald to let
him franchise their method.
Twelve years and several million hamburgers later, he bought them out
and went on to create the largest retail prepared food distribution system in
the world.
“The Most Successful Small Business in the World”
That’s what McDonald’s calls itself today.
And for good reason.
Because the success of McDonald’s is truly staggering.
Think about it. In less than forty years, Ray Kroc’s McDonald’s has
become a $40-billion-a-year business, with 28,707 restaurants worldwide—
and growing in number every minute—serving food to more than 43 million
people every day in 120 countries, representing more than 10 percent of the
gross restaurant receipts in America!
The average McDonald’s restaurant produces more than $2 million in
annual sales, and is more profitable than almost any other retail business in

--- page 68 ---
the world, with an average 17 percent pretax net profit.
But Ray Kroc created much more than just a fantastically successful
business. He created the model upon which an entire generation of
entrepreneurs have since built their fortunes—a model that was the genesis of
the franchise phenomenon.
It started as a trickle when a few entrepreneurs began to experiment with
Kroc’s formula for success. But it wasn’t long before the trickle turned into
Niagara Falls!
In 2000, there were 320,000 franchised businesses in 75 industries.
Franchises produce $1-trillion in sales each year—almost 50 percent of every
retail dollar spent in the nation—and had more than 8 million full- and part-
time people, the largest employer of high school youth in the country’s
economy.
But the genius of McDonald’s isn’t franchising itself. The franchise has
been around for more than a hundred years. Many companies—Coca-Cola
and General Motors among them—have utilized franchising as an effective
method of distribution to reach broadly expanding markets inexpensively.
The true genius of Ray Kroc’s McDonald’s is the Business Format Franchise.
It is the Business Format Franchise that has revolutionized American
business.
It is the Business Format Franchise, with one new franchise opening its
doors every eight minutes of every single business day, that has spawned so
much of the success of the franchise phenomenon over the past forty years.
And, according to studies conducted by the U.S. Commerce Department
from 1971 to 1987, less than 5 percent of franchises have been terminated on
an annual basis, or 25 percent in five years.
Compare that statistic to the more than 80-percent failure rate of
independently owned businesses, and you can immediately understand the
power of the Turn-Key Revolution in our economy, and the contribution that
the Business Format Franchise has made to it and the future success of your
business.
Turning the Key: The Business Format Franchise
The early franchise businesses, many of which still exist, were called
“trade name” franchises.
Under this system, the franchisor licenses the right to small companies to

--- page 69 ---
market its nationally known products locally.
But the Business Format Franchise moves a step beyond the trade name
franchise.
The Business Format Franchise not only lends its name to the smaller
enterprise but it also provides the franchisee with an entire system of doing
business.
And in that difference lies the true significance of the Turn-Key
Revolution and its phenomenal success.
The Turn-Key Revolution and the Business Format Franchise were born
of a belief that runs counter to what most business founders in this country
believe.
Most business founders believe that the success of a business resides in
the success of the product it sells.
To the trade name franchisor, the value of the franchise lies in the value
of the brand name that it is licensing: Cadillac, Mercedes, Coca-Cola.
There was a time when that belief was true, but it isn’t anymore. In a
world where brand names proliferate like snowflakes in a Minnesota blizzard,
it becomes more and more difficult—and infinitely more expensive—to
establish a secure position with a brand name and expect to keep it.
As a result, trade name franchises have been declining over the same
period that franchising in general has been exploding at an unprecedented
rate.
It is the Business Format Franchise that has accounted for that growth.
Because the Business Format Franchise is built on the belief that the true
product of a business is not what it sells but how it sells it.
The true product of a business is the business itself.
What Ray Kroc understood at McDonald’s was that the hamburger wasn’t
his product. McDonald’s was.
And he believed that for a most important reason.
Selling the Business Instead of the Product
Ray Kroc was the consummate entrepreneur. And like most
entrepreneurs, he suffered from one major liability. He had a huge dream and
very little money.
Enter the franchisee.
The franchisee became the vehicle for Ray Kroc to realize his dream.

--- page 70 ---
At that point, Ray Kroc began to look at his business as the product, and
at the franchisee as his first, last, and most important customer.
For the franchisee wasn’t interested in hamburgers or french fries or
milkshakes; he was interested in the business.
Driven by his desire to buy a business, the franchisee only wanted to
know one thing: “Does it work?”
Ray Kroc’s most important concern then became how to make certain his
business would work better than any other.
If McDonald’s was to fulfill the dream he had for it, the franchisee would
have to be willing to buy it.
And the only way Ray Kroc could assure himself of that was to make
certain that McDonald’s worked better than any of the other business
products around.
At the outset, Ray Kroc wasn’t just competing with other hamburger
businesses—he was competing with every other business opportunity around!
But there was a second reason that Ray Kroc had for making certain
McDonald’s would work.
Given the failure rate of most small businesses, he must have realized a
crucial fact: for McDonald’s to be a predictable success, the business would
have to work, because the franchisee, if left to his own devices, most
assuredly wouldn’t!
Once he understood this, Ray Kroc’s problem became his opportunity.
Forced to create a business that worked in order to sell it, he also created
a business that would work once it was sold, no matter who bought it.
Armed with that realization, he set about the task of creating a foolproof,
predictable business.
A systems-dependent business, not a people-dependent business.
A business that could work without him.
Unlike most small business owners before him—and since—Ray Kroc
went to work on his business, not in it.
He began to think about his business like an engineer working on a pre-
production prototype of a mass-produceable product.
He began to reengineer McDonald’s decades before the word and the
process came into fashion.
He began to think about McDonald’s just like Henry Ford must have
thought about the Model T.
How could the components of the prototype be constructed so that it

--- page 71 ---
could be assembled at a very low cost with totally interchangeable parts?
How could the components be constructed so that the resulting business
system could be replicated over and over again, each business working—just
like the Model T—as reliably as the thousands that preceded it?
What Ray Kroc did was to apply the thinking behind the Industrial
Revolution to the process of Business Development, and to a degree never
before experienced in a business enterprise.
The business-as-a-product would only sell if it worked. And the only way
to make certain it would work in the hands of a franchisee anywhere in the
world would be to build it out of perfectly predictable components that could
be tested in a prototype long before ever going into mass production.
Therein lies the secret behind the stunning success of the Business Format
Franchise, the launching pad for the Turn-Key Revolution.
That secret is the Franchise Prototype.
It is in the Franchise Prototype that every successful franchisor builds his
future.
It is in the Franchise Prototype that every extraordinary franchisor plants
the seeds of his fortune.
And it is in the Franchise Prototype that you can find the model you need
to make your business work.
Sarah and I couldn’t have picked a better time to have this conversation.
If she had ever felt the weight of being a Technician-turned-business-
owner, caught up in the doing of her business and the inordinate price she
was paying for it, it was right now.
It was ten o’clock at night. As usual, she had had a tumultuous day. Her
face was flush with the exertion of mopping the floors, bundling and tossing
out the trash, preparing the ovens for the next day, cleaning the counters to
their original high luster—in addition to a full day of waiting on customers;
serving up pie, coffee, and tea; washing, drying, and stacking plates, cups,
saucers; and shining the silver.
And yet, with all that had gone on in the shop that day, you couldn’t have
known it; for, as always, the shop was impeccable. And, despite the cost to
her of keeping it that way, I couldn’t help but notice the deep satisfaction
Sarah felt as she surveyed her domain. But she was obviously tired.
We pulled two chairs up to a table and quietly sipped the tea she had
prepared for us. The large clock ticked emphatically on the wall, punctuating

--- page 72 ---
our silence. An occasional car drove by the shop. People walked by the
shop’s windows, occasionally looking into the shop as they continued on
their journey into the night.
I waited for a sign from Sarah that she was ready.
Finally, she began thoughtfully and quietly. “You talk about McDonald’s
as an example to be modeled. I’m not sure I agree with you about that. I
know if my aunt were here today, she would think of McDonald’s as exactly
the opposite of what you’ve suggested it is. Talk to me about that,” she said.
“I’m interested in how you would respond to my aunt, about what you would
say to her.”
“You know, Sarah,” I began, “I can sense that something has shifted in
you today. Something important. I can sense also from the tone of your
question that you’re truly interested in pursuing this question about
McDonald’s, and I’m inspired to engage in the question with you at the
deepest level. I want to thank you for that.
“It’s true, many small business owners at first misunderstand my point
about McDonald’s. They associate fast food with low quality. They infer,
then, that by setting McDonald’s up as an example, I’m suggesting that one
can be incredibly successful in business despite the seemingly low quality of
the product delivered. When exactly the opposite is true. But, let me get back
to that in a moment.
“As for your aunt, even though I have never met her, from the way you
have described her I feel I know her. And this is what I would say to her if
she were here asking me the question herself:
“I would say that Ray Kroc was a man with a purpose. His purpose was
clear, undiluted, and sure. He lived in an ordinary world, like we all do, a
world in which most things didn’t work the way they were supposed to. At
McDonald’s, he saw something that did work, exactly as it was supposed to,
time after time after time. To Ray Kroc, that was an inspiration. In fact, he
was awed by it. He was a simple man. And he fell in love with the sheer
enormity of the thing he called McDonald’s.
“As certainly as you loved baking pies, Ray Kroc loved making
McDonald’s. As certainly as you loved producing an exceptional pie, Ray
Kroc loved producing an exceptional result, the same way, with the same
impact, time after time. As certainly as you loved the aroma, the smells, the
sight, the taste, of your kitchen, Ray Kroc loved the aroma, the smells, the
sight, the taste of McDonald’s. He was a man in love.

--- page 73 ---
“Now, from the outside in, I can understand why you might be critical of
McDonald’s. You might say that people shouldn’t eat meat. You might say
that the hamburgers could be fatter, or less fatty, or this or that. But what you
couldn’t say—what you could never say—is that McDonald’s doesn’t keep
its promise. Because it does. Better than just about any business in the world,
McDonald’s, the love of Ray Kroc’s life, still keeps its promise, long after
Ray Kroc has gone. It delivers exactly what we have come to expect of it
every single time.
“So that’s why I look upon McDonald’s as a model for every small
business.
“Because it can do in its more than 28,000 stores what most of us can’t do
in one!
“And to me, that’s what integrity is all about. It’s about doing what you
say you will do, and, if you can’t, learning how.
“If that is the measure of an incredible business—and I believe it is—then
there is no more incredible business than McDonald’s. Who among us small
business owners can say we do things as well?
“But McDonald’s is even more important than that.
“McDonald’s has not only created an extraordinary business, it has
created for all of us small business owners an extraordinary way to create an
extraordinary business. It has created a model we can emulate.
“And the profound impact that that has had on our economy over the past
four decades is beyond our comprehension.
“So, Sarah’s aunt, I honestly believe if you had known Ray Kroc, you
would have discovered in him a kindred spirit.
“You would have invited him into your kitchen and he would have
invited you into his.
“You would have discussed with him with great passion the art of
creating a fine pie crust and he would have discussed with you—with just as
great a passion—the art of creating a fine french fry.
“You would have shared with him your secret for preparing the fruit, just
as he would share with you his secret for preparing the hamburger buns he so
lovingly devoted himself to.
“You are two peas in a pod with one big exception.
“You, Sarah’s aunt, had but one kitchen in which you loved to work, your
kitchen, making your pies, alone, or with Sarah by your side.
“Ray Kroc had thousands of kitchens, in which he loved to work,

--- page 74 ---
perfecting all the time his ability to touch millions of people with the same
loving attention you’ve lavished on a few.
“You are a Technician, a craftsperson, who loves what you do.
“He was an Entrepreneur, albeit still a craftsperson, who loved what he
did.
“The only difference between the two of you is an order of magnitude.
“So let me tell you how he crafted something that size.”