# Chapter 5: Beyond the Comfort Zone
book: TheEMythRevisited
pages: 46-57
section_id: chapter-5

--- page 46 ---
5
BEYOND THE COMFORT ZONE
Drastic change creates an estrangement from the self, and generates a
need for a new birth of a new identity. And it perhaps depends on the
way this need is satisfied whether the process of change runs
smoothly or is attended with convulsions and explosions.
Eric Hoffer
The Temper of Our Time
Every Adolescent business reaches a point where it pushes beyond its
owner’s Comfort Zone—the boundary within which he feels secure in his
ability to control his environment, and outside of which he begins to lose that
control.
The Technician’s boundary is determined by how much he can do
himself.
The Manager’s is defined by how many technicians he can supervise
effectively or how many subordinate managers he can organize into a
productive effort.
The Entrepreneur’s boundary is a function of how many managers he can
engage in pursuit of his vision.
As a business grows, it invariably exceeds its owner’s ability to control it
—to touch, feel, and see the work that needs to be done, and to inspect its
progress personally as every technician needs to do.
Out of desperation, he does what he knows how to do rather than what he

--- page 47 ---
doesn’t, thereby abdicating his role as manager and passing his accountability
down to someone else—a “Harry.”
At that point, his desperation turns into hope. He hopes that Harry will
handle it so that he won’t have to worry about it anymore.
But Harry has needs of his own. Harry’s also a technician. He needs more
direction than The Technician can give him. He needs to know why he’s
doing what he’s doing. He needs to know the result he’s accountable for and
the standards against which his work is being evaluated. He also needs to
know where the business is going and where his accountabilities fit into its
overall strategy.
To produce effectively, Harry needs something The Technician-turned-
business-owner isn’t capable of giving him—a manager! And the lack of one
causes the business to go into a tailspin.
And as the business grows beyond the owner’s Comfort Zone—as the
tailspin accelerates—there are only three courses of action to be taken, only
three ways the business can turn. It can return to Infancy. It can go for broke.
Or it can hang on for dear life.
Let’s take a look at each.
Getting Small Again
One of the most consistent and predictable reactions of The Technician-
turned-business-owner to Adolescent chaos is the decision to “get small”
again. If you can’t control the chaos, get rid of it.
Go back to the way it used to be when you did everything yourself, when
you didn’t have people to worry about, or too many customers, or too many
unpayable payables and unreceivable receivables, or too much inventory.
In short, go back to the time when business was simple, back to Infancy.
And thousands upon thousands of technicians do just that. They get rid of
their people, get rid of their inventory, wrap up their payables in a large bag,
rent a smaller facility, put the machine in the middle, put the telephone by the
machine, and go back to doing it all by themselves again.
They go back to being the owner, sole proprietor, chief cook and bottle
washer—doing everything that needs to be done, all alone, but comfortable
with the feeling of regained control.
“What can go wrong?” they think to themselves, forgetting at once that
they’ve been there before. Predictably, this too takes its toll.

--- page 48 ---
One morning—it could be six weeks or six years following the day you
“got small” again—the inevitable happens.
You wake up in bed, and your spouse turns to you and says: “What’s
wrong? You’re not looking too good.”
“I’m not feeling too good,” you answer.
“Do you want to talk about it?” he or she asks.
“It’s simple,” you say, “I don’t want to go in there anymore!”
Then your spouse asks you the obvious question: “But if you don’t, who
will?”
And all of a sudden you are struck with the reality of your condition.
You realize something you’ve avoided all these years.
You come face to face with the unavoidable truth:
You don’t own a business—you own a job!
What’s more, it’s the worst job in the world!
You can’t close it when you want to, because if it’s closed you don’t get
paid.
You can’t leave it when you want to, because when you leave there’s
nobody there to do the work.
You can’t sell it when you want to, because who wants to buy a job?
At that point you feel the despair and the cynicism almost every small
business owner gets to feel.
If there was ever a dream, however small, it’s gone. And with it, any
desire to keep busy, busy, busy.
You don’t wash the windows anymore.
You don’t sweep the floors.
The customers become a problem rather than an opportunity. Because if
somebody buys something, you’re going to have to do the work.
Your standards of dress begin to deteriorate.
The sign on the front door fades and peels.
And you don’t care.
For when the dream is gone, the only thing left is work.
The tyranny of routine.
The day-to-day grind of purposeless activity.
Finally, you close the doors. There’s nothing to keep you there anymore.
According to the Small Business Administration, more than 400,000 such
businesses close their doors in the United States every year.
And it’s understandable.

--- page 49 ---
Your business, once the shining promise of your life, and now no promise
at all, has gradually become a mortuary for dead dreams.
Going for Broke
The Adolescent business has another alternative that is certainly less
painful and decidedly more dramatic than “getting small.” It can just keep
growing faster and faster until it self-destructs of its own momentum.
The roll call is endless: Itel, Osbourne Computer, Coleco, and countless
more. All such “going-for-broke” companies were started with an
Entrepreneurial Seizure by a Technician who focused on the wrong end of
the business, the commodity the business made, rather than the business
itself.
“Going-for-broke” businesses are a sign of our time.
They are a high-tech phenomenon.
With the explosion of new technology and the numbers of those who
create it, a whole new breed of technicians has flocked to the business arena.
Along with these wizards and their seemingly unlimited technical
virtuosity, an avalanche of new products has thundered through the wide-
open doors of an enthralled and receptive marketplace.
Unfortunately, most of these companies barely get through the doors
before the uncontrollable momentum that got them there forces them to
stumble and then fall.
All the excesses of Adolescence, frustrating and bewildering as they
might be in a normally expanding company, are disastrous in a “going-for-
broke” business. As quickly as it grows, chaos grows even faster. For tied to
the tail of a technological breakthrough, The Technician and his people rarely
break free long enough to gain some perspective about their condition. The
demand for the commodity of which they are so proud quickly exceeds their
chronically Adolescent ability to produce it.
The result is almost always catastrophic. The business explodes, leaving
behind people who most often justify the explosion as an inevitable
consequence of doing business on a “fast track” where luck and speed and a
brilliant bit of technological daring-do are the necessary components for
making it big.
The reality is otherwise.
Luck and speed and brilliant technology have never been enough, because

--- page 50 ---
somebody is always luckier, faster, and technologically brighter.
Unfortunately, once on a fast track, there’s precious little time to listen. The
race is won by reflex, a stroke of genius, or a stroke of luck.
“Going for broke” is the high-tech equivalent of Russian Roulette,
oftentimes played by people who don’t even know the gun is loaded!
Adolescent Survival
The most tragic possibility of all for an Adolescent business is that it
actually survives!
You’re an incredibly strong-willed, stubborn, single-minded individual
who’s determined not to be beaten.
You go into your business every morning with a vengeance, absolutely
convinced that it’s a jungle out there, and fully committed to doing
whatever’s necessary to survive.
And you do survive. Kicking and scratching, beating up your people and
your customers, ranting and raving at your family and friends—because, after
all, you’ve got to keep the business going. And you know there’s only one
way to do it: you’ve got to be there—all the time.
In Adolescent Survival you’re consumed by the business and the
possibility of losing it.
And so you put everything you have into it.
And, for whatever reason, you manage to keep it going.
Day after day, fighting the same battles, in exactly the same way you did
the day before.
You never change.
Night after night, you go home to unwind, only to wind up even tighter in
anticipation of tomorrow.
Finally, your business doesn’t explode—you do!
You’re like a twelve-cylinder engine working on one cylinder, pumping
away, trying with everything you’ve got to produce twelve cylinders worth of
results.
But finally, and inevitably, there’s nothing left.
There’s simply nothing more you can do, except face the fact that one
cylinder can’t produce the results of twelve, no matter how hard it tries.
Something has to give, and that something is you.
Does this sound familiar?

--- page 51 ---
Well, if you’ve been in business for a while, it should.
And if you haven’t been in business for long, it probably will sound
familiar one day.
Because the tragedy is that the condition of Infancy and Adolescence
dominates American small business.
It is the condition in most of the small businesses we at E-Myth
Worldwide have visited over the past twenty-four years, a condition of
rampant confusion and wasted spirits.
It didn’t need to happen. There is a better way.
The nerve I had touched earlier in Sarah had diminished enough for her to
collect her thoughts.
“How did you know?” she asked me quietly. “Have you been talking to
someone about me?” she said, in part wanting to believe I knew more about
her story than I had let on, and in part knowing she was just like everyone
else.
She knew the answer. Before I could confirm it, she said, “I got small
again. And I still don’t understand what happened.”
She looked around the small shop as though seeing someone or something
I couldn’t.
“My Harry was Elizabeth,” she sighed.
“I hired her when the business was only six months old. She did
everything for me, Elizabeth did. She was absolutely incredible. I don’t know
what I would have done without her. She did the books. She helped me bake.
She cleaned up in the morning and after we closed. She hired my first three
employees, taught them how to do the various jobs that needed to be done.
She was always here when I needed her. And, as the business grew over the
next two years, Elizabeth took on more and more of the responsibility for the
business. She worked as hard as I did. And she seemed to love it here. And
me. She seemed to love me too. Goodness knows, I loved her.
“And then, one day—it was a Wednesday, June 10th, I believe, at seven
in the morning—she called me and told me she wouldn’t be coming in any
longer. That she had taken another job. That she couldn’t afford to work for
what I was paying her. Just like that! I couldn’t believe my ears. I couldn’t
believe that she meant it. I thought it was a joke. I laughed, and said, ‘C’mon
Elizabeth,’ or something like that. And Elizabeth said she was sorry. And
then hung up! Hung up. Just hung up.

--- page 52 ---
“Well, I stood there and wept. And then I felt fear, a fear I hadn’t ever felt
before. I felt cold inside. How could this be? I thought to myself. How could
someone I thought I knew so well, someone I trusted so much, have suddenly
become a stranger? What in the world did this say about me? About my lack
of judgment? About the conversations I should have had with Elizabeth but
didn’t?
“But the pies needed to be removed from the oven, and the floors needed
to be cleaned, and the shop prepared for opening, and so, despite the pain I
was feeling, the sickness in my stomach, I went to work. And I haven’t
stopped since. The people she hired left soon afterward. To be honest with
you, I never really had a connection with them. They were Elizabeth’s
people.
“When I think back now, I see how easy it was for me to do. How easy it
was for me to become absorbed by the work rather than the people. And I
guess they knew that. Because after Elizabeth left they all seemed to regard
me with suspicion. Like I had let her go without telling them or something. If
Elizabeth could leave, a woman like that, what did it say about them for
staying? At least that’s what I believed they were thinking. Who knew? I was
too devastated to ask. Since then I haven’t had the heart to hire anyone to
replace them. The thought of it is terrifying to me. The thought of bringing
strangers into my life like that again feels like a risk I don’t want to take. And
so I do it all myself. And I know I can’t do it much longer. Besides which,
what’s the point?”
Sarah sighed deeply and looked across at me.
“So, there’s my Comfort Zone,” she said. “What do I do about that?”
“Start all over again—but differently this time,” I answered.
“It’s the only way out of the trap.”
Most of us have had the experience of being disappointed by someone in
whom we have put our trust as a direct result of our indifference or lack of
understanding or lack of skill or lack of attention.
And most of us learn eventually, if for no other reason than because we
realize that we can’t be everywhere at once, to trust again.
But trust can only take us so far.
Trust alone can set us up to repeat those same disappointing experiences.
Because true trust comes from knowing, not from blind faith.
And to know, one must understand.

--- page 53 ---
And to understand, one must have an intimate awareness of what
conditions are truly present. What people know and what they don’t. What
people do and what they don’t. What people want and what they don’t. How
people do what they do and how people don’t. Who people are and who they
aren’t.
In short, Sarah trusted Elizabeth blindly. Sarah simply wanted to believe
in Elizabeth. It was easier that way. Because if Sarah trusted blindly, if she
simply left it all up to chance, she wouldn’t be forced to do the work she
didn’t want to do. The work of coming to agreement about what her
relationship with Elizabeth was about. What role each of them was there to
play. What it meant for Sarah to be an owner and Elizabeth to be her
employee. What it meant for Sarah to set out the rules of the game that she
was expecting Elizabeth to play.
Because Sarah didn’t feel comfortable in this new role, this role of the
owner, this role of The Entrepreneur, this role of a businessperson, she left
everything up to chance. She abdicated her accountability as an owner and
took on the role of just another employee. She avoided fully participating in
her relationship with Elizabeth, and, in the process, created a dynamic
between herself and her employee built on a weak structure. An omission that
foretold Elizabeth’s inevitable departure and Sarah’s inevitable pain.
I certainly didn’t need to tell Sarah that she had no one to blame but
herself. I just needed to find the right way to show her how she could do it
differently the next time.
“The next time,” I said, “you’ll know that your business is destined to
grow, and that once it does your job is going to be significantly different. For
now, that’s all you need.
“Small, smaller, smallest. How big is small? One person? Ten people?
Sixty people? One hundred fifty people? To a Fortune 500 company, a
Fortune 1,000 company is small. To a Fortune 1,000 company, a Fortune
3,000 company is small. To a ten-person company, a two-person company is
small.
“The true question is not how small a business should be but how big.
How big can your business naturally become, with the operative word being
naturally?
“Because, whatever that size is, any limitation you place on its growth is
unnatural, shaped not by the market or by your lack of capital (even though
that may play a part) but by your own personal limitations. Your lack of skill,

--- page 54 ---
knowledge, and experience, and, most of all, passion, for growing a healthy,
functionally dynamic, extraordinary business.
“In this regard, ‘getting small’ is, rather than an intentional act, a reaction
to the pain and fear induced by uncontrolled and uncontrollable growth, both
of which could have been anticipated provided the owner had been prepared
to facilitate the growth in a balanced, healthy, proactive way.
“But to do that requires intention at the outset of the business,
entrepreneurial intention, as well as a willingness—no, a true passion—for
the personal transformation such a process will call for: accessing new skills,
new understanding, new knowledge, new emotional depth, new wisdom.
“You might say that the chaos that takes place in every Adolescent
business can produce one of two outcomes for the small business owner who
suddenly finds himself in the middle of it. For the truly passionate owner,
Don Juan’s ‘warrior,’ it can provide him with an opportunity to transmute his
personal ‘lead’ into ‘gold.’ Or the fires can become so fearsome that he
shrinks back to the ‘safety’ of the smaller life he came from not too long
before—the ‘lead’ I’ve got is better than the ‘gold’ I haven’t got. Better safe
than sorry.
“So, in this context, a business that ‘gets small again’ is a business
reduced to the level of its owner’s personal resistance to change, to its
owner’s Comfort Zone, in which the owner waits and works, works and
waits, hoping for something positive to happen.
“This condition reminds me of a line from Samuel Beckett’s Waiting for
Godot in which Estragon, having waited around for days hoping the mythical
Godot will arrive and relieve him of his misery, turns to his companion,
Vladimir, and says, ‘I can’t go on like this.’ To which Vladimir replies,
‘That’s what you think.’
“So, if the natural disposition of every business is to either grow or
contract—and it is; there is no denying that—then ‘getting small again’ is the
natural inclination of The Technician-turned-owner to shrink from the
unknown, to shrink from the business she has created, to constrain the
business from creating demands on her to which she feels hopelessly
inadequate to respond appropriately.
“In short, businesses that ‘get small again’ die. They literally implode
upon themselves.
“Not right away, necessarily. But over time they die. Atrophy and die.
They can’t do anything else.

--- page 55 ---
“And the result of that is enormous disappointment, lost investment,
shattered lives, not only the owner’s but those of the employees, the families
of both the owner and the employees, the customers, the suppliers, the
lenders, all of those people whose lives have somehow been intertwined with
the life of this small business, and now with its death.
“The tragedy is that all this could have been prevented had the business
been started differently, had The Technician suffering from an
Entrepreneurial Seizure approached the business in a broader, more
entrepreneurial way.
“Of course, you couldn’t have anticipated everything that has happened to
you so far in your business,” I said to Sarah, “but you could have anticipated
much of it.
“You could have anticipated what happened to Elizabeth and the people
she hired.
“You could have anticipated that people would love your pies and that the
business would therefore have to grow.
“You could have anticipated that growth would bring additional
responsibilities, additional skills required, additional capital needed to
respond to the added demand that growth always places on a business and on
people.
“In short, while you couldn’t have known everything, you could certainly
have known more than you do.
“And that’s your job, Sarah! The job of the owner. And if you don’t do it,
nobody will.
“Simply put, your job is to prepare yourself and your business for growth.
“To educate yourself sufficiently so that, as your business grows, the
business’s foundation and structure can carry the additional weight.
“And as awesome a responsibility as that may seem to you, you have no
other choice—if your business is to thrive, that is.
“It’s up to you to dictate your business’s rate of growth as best you can by
understanding the key processes that need to be performed, the key objectives
that need to be achieved, the key position you are aiming your business to
hold in the marketplace.
“By asking the right questions, such as: Where do I wish to be? When do
I wish to be there? How much capital will that take? How many people,
doing what work, and how? What technology will be required? How large a
space will be needed, at Benchmark One, at Benchmark Two, at Benchmark

--- page 56 ---
Three?
“Will you be wrong at times? Will you make mistakes? Will you change
your mind? Of course you will! More often than not. But, done right, you will
also have contingency plans in place. Best case, worst case. And sometimes
you will simply fly by the seat of your pants; you will go with the flow,
follow your intuition.
“But all the while, even while you’re guessing, the key is to plan,
envision, and articulate what you see in the future both for yourself and for
your employees. Because if you don’t articulate it—I mean, write it down,
clearly, so others can understand it—you don’t own it! And do you know that
in all the years I’ve been doing this work with small business owners, out of
the thousands upon thousands we’ve met, there have only been a few who
had any plan at all! Nothing written, nothing committed to paper, nothing
concrete at all.
“Remember, Sarah, any plan is better than no plan.
“Because in the process of defining the future, the plan begins to shape
itself to reality, both the reality of the world out there and the reality you are
able to create in here.
“And as those two realities merge, they form a new reality—call it your
reality, call it the unique invention that is uniquely yours, the reality of your
mind and your heart uniting with all the elements of your business, and your
business with the world, shaping, designing, collaborating, to form something
that never existed before in exactly that way.
“And that is the sign of a Mature company. A Mature company is started
differently than all the rest. A Mature company is founded on a broader
perspective, an entrepreneurial perspective, a more intelligent point of view.
About building a business that works not because of you but without you.
“And because it starts that way, it is more likely to continue that way.
And therein resides the true difference between an Adolescent company,
where everything is left up to chance, and a Mature company, where there is
a vision against which the present is shaped.
“But I’m getting ahead of myself,” I said. “The important thing is that
your experience could have been completely different. That there is an
entirely different way to start a business than the way you and most
Technicians-turned-business-owners start theirs. And that anyone can do it!”
I looked at Sarah and caught the glow in her eyes.
“I’m inspired by the idea of it,” she said softly. “All of a sudden

--- page 57 ---
everything that has looked so dark feels light again.”
But, no sooner had she begun to let herself thrill to the idea of building a
business that works that some other thought—a dark thought—captured her
attention.
“But what do I do about Elizabeth?” she said.
“What do I do about Elizabeth?” The question every Technician-turned-
owner wants answered.
As though, by answering that question, everything else will be answered.
As if the answer to all of the frustrations most small business owners
experience is somehow tied to particular people.
As if within the complexity of Sarah’s relationship with Elizabeth—
within all relationships for that matter—there exists some key which, once
turned, could make everything right again.
Well, I’m no genius, but I know that there is no such key.
There’s just us, you and me, fumbling about in our often inadequate way,
constantly being surprised by our own and other people’s behavior, how
badly we’ve done it, how out of touch with our own and others’ feelings
we’ve discovered ourselves to be.
I looked Sarah in the eye, got very quiet, and said, “Sarah, the real
question is not what to do about Elizabeth but what do you do about all the
Elizabeths in your future?
“You did the best you could. And so did Elizabeth. It’s time to get on
with your life. To build your business in an enlivening way. Are you ready?”
Sarah smiled at me, her eyes positively gleaming.
“I’m ready if you are,” she said.
“Then let’s talk about Maturity for a minute,” I said.
“Because that’s where your future lies.”