# Chapter 3: Infancy — The Technician's Phase
book: TheEMythRevisited
pages: 33-39
section_id: chapter-3

--- page 33 ---
3
INFANCY: THE TECHNICIAN’S
PHASE
…my Uncle Sol had a skunk farm but the skunks caught cold and
died and so my Uncle Sol imitated the skunks in a subtle manner…
e. e. cummings
Collected Poems
It is self-evident that business, like people, are supposed to grow; and with
growth, comes change.
Unfortunately, most businesses are not run according to this principle.
Instead most businesses are operated according to what the owner wants as
opposed to what the business needs.
And what The Technician who runs the company wants is not growth or
change but exactly the opposite. He wants a place to go to work, free to do
what he wants, when he wants, free from the constraints of work
Unfortunately, what The Technician wants dooms his business before it
even begins.
To understand why, let’s take a look at the three phases of a business’s
growth: Infancy, Adolescence, and Maturity.
Understanding each phase, and what goes on in the business owner’s
mind during each of them, is critical to discovering why most small
businesses don’t thrive and ensuring that yours does.

--- page 34 ---
The Boss is dead, and you, The Technician, are free at last. Finally, you can
do your own thing in your own business. Hope runs high. The air is electric
with possibility. It’s like being let out of school for the summer. Your
newfound freedom is intoxicating.
In the beginning nothing is too much for your business to ask. As The
Technician, you’re accustomed to “paying your dues.” So the hours devoted
to the business during Infancy are not spent grudgingly but optimistically.
There’s work to be done, and that’s what you’re all about. After all, your
middle name is Work. “Besides,” you think, “this work is for me.”
And so you work. Ten, twelve, fourteen hours a day. Seven days a week.
Even when you’re at home, you’re at work. All your thoughts, all your
feelings, revolve around your new business. You can’t get it out of your
mind. You’re consumed by it; totally invested in doing whatever is necessary
to keep it alive.
But now you’re doing not only the work you know how to do but the
work you don’t know how to do as well. You’re not only making it but
you’re also buying it, selling it, and shipping it. During Infancy, you’re a
Master Juggler, keeping all the balls in the air.
It’s easy to spot a business in Infancy—the owner and the business are
one and the same thing.
If you removed the owner from an Infancy business, there would be no
business left. It would disappear!
In Infancy, you are the business.
It’s even named after you—“JOE’S PLACE,” “TOMMY’S JOINT,”
“MARY’S FINE FOODS”—so the customer won’t forget you’re The Boss.
And soon—if you’re lucky—all of the sweat, worry, and work begin to
pay off. You’re good. You work hard. The customers don’t forget. They’re
coming back. They’re sending in friends. Their friends have friends. And
they’re all talking about Joe, Tommy, and Mary. They’re all talking about
you.
If you can believe what your customers are saying, there’s never been
anyone like Joe, Tommy, and Mary. Joe, Tommy, and Mary are just like old
friends. They work hard for their money. And they do good work. Joe is the
best barber I ever went to. Tommy is the best printer I ever used. Mary makes
the best corned beef sandwich I ever ate. Your customers are crazy about
you. They keep coming, in droves.
And you love it!

--- page 35 ---
But then it changes. Subtly at first, but gradually it becomes obvious.
You’re falling behind. There’s more work to do than you can possibly get
done. The customers are relentless. They want you; they need you. You’ve
spoiled them for anyone else. You’re working at breakneck speed.
And then the inevitable happens. You, the Master Juggler, begin to drop
some of the balls!
It can’t be helped. No matter how hard you try, you simply can’t catch
them all. Your enthusiasm for working with the customers wanes. Deliveries,
once early, are now late. The product begins to show the wear and tear.
Nothing seems to work the way it did at first.
Joe’s haircuts don’t look the way they used to. “I said short in the back,
not on the sides.” “My name’s not Fred; that’s my brother—and I never had a
crewcut!”
Glitches start showing up in Tommy’s printing: typos, ink smudges,
wrong colors, wrong paper. “I didn’t order business cards; I ordered catalog
covers.” “Pink? I said brown!”
Mary’s best-tasting-biggest-stack-of-corned-beef-in-the-world suddenly
looks like pastrami. It is pastrami. “Didn’t you ask for pastrami?” Another
irritated voice calls out: “Where’s my pastrami sandwich? This is corned
beef!” And yet another: “What are these garbanzo beans doing in my
meatloaf?”
What do you do? You stretch. You work harder. You put in more time,
more energy.
If you put in twelve hours before, you now put in fourteen.
If you put in fourteen hours before, you now put in sixteen.
If you put in sixteen hours before, you now put in twenty. But the balls
keep dropping!
All of a sudden, Joe, Tommy, and Mary wish their names weren’t on the
sign.
All of a sudden, they want to hide.
All of a sudden, you find yourself at the end of an unbelievably hectic
week, late on a Saturday night, poring over the books, trying to make some
sense out of the mess, thinking about all of the work you didn’t get done this
week, and all of the work waiting for you next week. And you suddenly
realize it simply isn’t going to get done. There’s simply no way in the world
you can do all that work yourself!
In a flash, you realize that your business has become The Boss you

--- page 36 ---
thought you left behind. There’s no getting rid of the Boss!
Infancy ends when the owner realizes that the business cannot continue to run
the way it has been; that, in order for it to survive, it will have to change.
When that happens—when the reality sinks in—most business failures
occur.
When that happens, most of The Technicians lock their doors behind
them and walk away.
The rest go on to Adolescence.
Sarah was beginning to look defeated again. I had seen that look before on
the faces of countless clients. When a Technician-turned-business-owner is
suddenly confronted with the reality of her situation, a sense of hopelessness
can set in. The challenge can seem overwhelming. But, I sensed that Sarah
would struggle with the idea—and herself—until she got it.
“I guess I still don’t get it,” she said. “What’s wrong with being a
Technician? I used to love the work I do. And if I didn’t have to do all these
other things, I would still love it!”
“Of course you would,” I answered. “And that’s exactly the point!
“There’s nothing wrong with being a Technician. There’s only something
wrong with being a Technician who also owns a business! Because as a
Technician-turned-business-owner, your focus is upside down. You see the
world from the bottom up rather than from the top down. You have a tactical
view rather than a strategic view. You see the work that has to get done, and
because of the way you’re built, you immediately jump in to do it! You
believe that a business is nothing more than an aggregate of the various types
of work done in it, when in fact it is much more than that.
“If you want to work in a business, get a job in somebody else’s business!
But don’t go to work in your own. Because while you’re working, while
you’re answering the telephone, while you’re baking pies, while you’re
cleaning the windows and the floors, while you’re doing it, doing it, doing it,
there’s something much more important that isn’t getting done. And it’s the
work you’re not doing, the strategic work, the entrepreneurial work, that will
lead your business forward, that will give you the life you’ve not yet known.
“No,” I said, truly enjoying this, “there’s nothing wrong with technical
work; it is, it can be, pure joy.

--- page 37 ---
“It’s only a problem when The Technician consumes all the other
personalities. When The Technician fills your day with work. When The
Technician avoids the challenge of learning how to grow a business. When
The Technician shrinks from the entrepreneurial role so necessary to the
lifeblood, the momentum, of a truly extraordinary small business, and from
the managerial role so critical to the operational balance or grounding of a
small business on a day-to-day basis.
“To be a great Technician is simply insufficient to the task of building a
great small business. Being consumed by the tactical work of the business, as
every Technician suffering from an Entrepreneurial Seizure is, leads to only
one thing: a complicated, frustrating, and, eventually, demeaning job!
“I know you know what that feels like, Sarah. Can you see that as long as
you view your business from The Technician’s perspective, you are doomed
to continue having this experience?” I asked her as gently as I could.
I saw that Sarah was still struggling with the idea of doing what she does
differently. I waited for the question I knew was brewing, and it wasn’t long
before it came.
“But I can’t even imagine what my business would be like without me
doing the work,” she said. “It has always depended on me. If it weren’t for
me, my customers would go someplace else. I’m not sure I understand what’s
really wrong with that.”
“Well, think about it,” I said. “In a business that depends on you, on your
style, on your personality, on your presence, on your talent and willingness to
do the work, if you’re not there why of course your customers would go
someplace else. Wouldn’t you?
“Because in a business like that what your customers are buying is not
your business’s ability to give them what they want but your ability to give
them what they want. And that’s what’s wrong with it!
“What if you don’t want to be there? What if you’d like to be someplace
else? On a vacation? Or at home? Reading a book? Working in the garden?
Or on a sabbatical, for God’s sake? Isn’t there any place you would rather be
at times than in your business, filling the needs of your customers who need
you so badly because you’re the only one who can do it?
“What if you’re sick, or feel like being sick? Or what if you just feel lazy?
“Don’t you see? If your business depends on you, you don’t own a
business—you have a job. And it’s the worst job in the world because you’re
working for a lunatic!

--- page 38 ---
“And, besides, that’s not the purpose of going into business.
“The purpose of going into business is to get free of a job so you can
create jobs for other people.
“The purpose of going into business is to expand beyond your existing
horizons. So you can invent something that satisfies a need in the
marketplace that has never been satisfied before. So you can live an
expanded, stimulating new life.”
Sarah said, “I hate to beat a dead horse, but what if I want to do the
technical work in my business? What if I don’t want to do anything else but
that?”
“Then for God’s sake,” I said as emphatically as I dared, “get rid of your
business! And get rid of it as quickly as you can. Because you can’t have it
both ways. You can’t ‘have your pie and eat it too.’ You can’t ignore the
financial accountabilities, the marketing accountabilities, the sales and
administrative accountabilities. You can’t ignore your future employees’
need for leadership, for purpose, for responsible management, for effective
communication, for something more than just a job in which their sole
purpose is to support you doing your job. Let alone what your business needs
from you if it’s to thrive: that you understand the way a business works, that
you understand the dynamics of a business—cash flow, growth, customer
sensitivity, competitive sensitivity, and so forth.
“The point is,” I said to her, watching her face sink and then begin to lift
with an unexpressed question, “if all you want from a business of your own is
the opportunity to do what you did before you started your business, get paid
more for it, and have more freedom to come and go, your greed—I know that
sounds harsh, but that’s what it is—your self-indulgence will eventually
consume both you and your business.”
I paused and then continued because I could see that Sarah was not yet
totally convinced.
“You just can’t get there from here! You just can’t play the role of The
Technician and ignore the roles of The Entrepreneur and The Manager
simply because you’re unprepared to play them.
“Because, the moment you chose to start a small business, Sarah, you
unwittingly chose to play a significantly larger game than any game you had
ever played before.
“And to play this new game, called building a small business that actually
works, your Entrepreneur needs to be coaxed out, nourished, and given the

--- page 39 ---
room she needs to expand, and your Manager needs to be supported as well
so she can develop her skill at creating order and translating the
entrepreneurial vision into actions that can be efficiently manifested in the
real world.
“Anything less than that will eventually push you to the brink of disaster
and, finally, over the edge. Because a small business simply demands that we
do it or the business will shrivel on the vine.
“So whether we like it or not, we have to learn how. The exciting thing is,
that once you begin to, once your Technician begins to let go, once you make
room for the rest of you to flourish, the game becomes more rewarding than
you can possibly imagine at this point in your business’s life.”
“Tell me more about that,” Sarah said. “I really want to know.”
“I will,” I answered. “Although I sense that you already understand quite
a bit more than you think. But first, let’s go on to Adolescence, the second
stage in a small business’s growth.”