# Chapter 11: Your Business Development Program
book: TheEMythRevisited
pages: 105-106
section_id: chapter-11

--- page 105 ---
11
YOUR BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT
PROGRAM
And I say to ye all, good friends, that as ye grow in golf, ye come to
see the things ye learn there in every other place. The grace that
comes from such a discipline, the extra feel in the hands, the extra
strength and knowin’, all those special powers ye’ve felt from time to
time, begin to enter our lives.
Michael Murphy
Golf in the Kingdom
Now you understand the task ahead: to think of your business as though it
were the prototype for 5,000 more just like it.
To imagine that someone will walk through your door with the intention
of buying your business—but only if it works.
And only if it works without a lot of work and without you to work it.
Imagine yourself at that moment. Imagine your smile inside as you say,
“Let me show you how it works,” knowing that not only will it work but it
will work better than any business he’s ever seen.
Imagine yourself taking the potential buyer through your business,
explaining each component and how it works with every other component.
How you’ve innovated systems solutions to people problems, how you’ve
quantified the results of those innovations, and how you’ve orchestrated the

--- page 106 ---
innovations so that they produce the same results every single time.
Imagine yourself introducing the potential buyer of your business to your
people, and standing by while they proudly explain their accountabilities to
the fascinated stranger.
Imagine how impressed the potential buyer of your business would be
upon being presented with such order, such predictability, such
irreproachable control.
Imagine the results of your Business Development Program.
Your Business Development Program is the step-by-step process through
which you convert your existing business—or the one you’re about to create
—into a perfectly organized model for thousands more just like it.
Your Business Development Program is the vehicle through which you
can create your Franchise Prototype.
The Program is composed of seven distinct steps:
1. Your Primary Aim
2. Your Strategic Objective
3. Your Organizational Strategy
4. Your Management Strategy
5. Your People Strategy
6. Your Marketing Strategy
7. Your Systems Strategy
Let’s get started.