# Chapter 2: The Entrepreneur, the Manager, and the Technician
book: TheEMythRevisited
pages: 22-32
section_id: chapter-2

--- page 22 ---
2
THE ENTREPRENEUR, THE
MANAGER, AND THE
TECHNICIAN
Thus, in the course of his life, one man acquires many personal
qualities, many personages, many ‘I’s’ (because each, speaking for
itself independently of the others says ‘I,’ ‘me,’ when it appears).
Jean Vaysse
Toward Awakening
No, The Technician isn’t the only problem.
The problem is more complicated than that.
The problem is that everybody who goes into business is actually three-
people-in-one: The Entrepreneur, The Manager, and The Technician.
And the problem is compounded by the fact that while each of these
personalities wants to be the boss, none of them wants to have a boss.
So they start a business together in order to get rid of the boss. And the
conflict begins.
To show you how the problem manifests itself in all of us, let’s examine
the way our various internal personalities interact. Let’s take a look at two
personalities we’re all familiar with: The Fat Guy and The Skinny Guy.
Have you ever decided to go on a diet?

--- page 23 ---
You’re sitting in front of the television set one Saturday afternoon,
watching an athletic competition, awed by the athletes’ stamina and dexterity.
You’re eating a sandwich, your second since you sat down to watch the
event two hours before.
You’re feeling sluggish in the face of all the action on the screen when,
suddenly, somebody wakes up in you and says, “What are you doing? Look
at yourself, You’re Fat! You’re out of shape! Do something about it!”
It has happened to us all. Somebody wakes up inside us with a totally
different picture of who we should be and what we should be doing. In this
case, let’s call him The Skinny Guy.
Who’s The Skinny Guy? He’s the one who uses words like discipline,
exercise, organization. The Skinny Guy is intolerant, self-righteous, a stickler
for detail, a compulsive tyrant.
The Skinny Guy abhors fat people. Can’t stand sitting around. Needs to
be on the move. Lives for action.
The Skinny Guy has just taken over. Watch out—things are about to
change.
Before you know it, you’re cleaning all the fattening foods out of the
refrigerator. You’re buying a new pair of running shoes, barbells, and sweats.
Things are going to be different around here. You have a new lease on life.
You plan your new physical regimen: up at five, run three miles, cold shower
at six, a breakfast of wheat toast, black coffee, and half a grapefruit; then, ride
your bicycle to work, home by seven, run another two miles, to bed at ten—
the world’s already a different place!
And you actually pull it off! By Monday night, you’ve lost two pounds.
You go to sleep dreaming of winning the Boston Marathon. Why not? The
way things are going, it’s only a matter of time.
Tuesday night you get on the scale. Another pound gone! You’re
incredible. Gorgeous. A lean machine.
On Wednesday, you really pour it on. You work out an extra hour in the
morning, an extra half-hour at night.
You can’t wait to get on the scale. You strip down to your bare skin,
shivering in the bathroom, filled with expectation of what your scale is going
to tell you. You step lightly onto it and look down. What you see is…nothing.
You haven’t lost an ounce. You’re exactly the same as you were on Tuesday.
Dejection creeps in. You begin to feel a slight twinge of resentment.
“After all that work? After all that sweat and effort? And then—nothing? It

--- page 24 ---
isn’t fair.” But you shrug it off. After all, tomorrow’s another day. You go to
bed, vowing to work harder on Thursday. But somehow something has
changed.
You don’t know what’s changed until Thursday morning.
It’s raining.
The room is cold.
Something feels different.
What is it?
For a minute or two you can’t quite put your finger on it.
And then you get it: somebody else is in your body.
It’s The Fat Guy!
He’s back!
And he doesn’t want to run.
As a matter of fact, he doesn’t even want to get out of bed. It’s cold
outside. “Run? Are you kidding me?” The Fat Guy doesn’t want anything to
do with it. The only exercise he might be interested in is eating!
And all of a sudden you find yourself in front of the refrigerator—inside
the refrigerator—all over the kitchen!
Food is now your major interest.
The Marathon is gone; the lean machine is gone; the sweats and barbells
and running shoes are gone.
The Fat Guy is back. He’s running the show again.
It happens to all of us, time and time again. Because we’ve been deluded
into thinking we’re really one person.
And so when The Skinny Guy decides to change things we actually
believe that it’s I who’s making that decision.
And when The Fat Guy wakes up and changes it all back again, we think
it’s I who’s making that decision too.
But it isn’t I. It’s we.
The Skinny Guy and The Fat Guy are two totally different personalities,
with different needs, different interests, and different lifestyles.
That’s why they don’t like each other. They each want totally different
things.
The problem is that when you’re The Skinny Guy, you’re totally
consumed by his needs, his interests, his lifestyle.
And then something happens—the scale disappoints you, the weather
turns cold, somebody offers you a ham sandwich.

--- page 25 ---
At that moment, The Fat Guy, who’s been waiting in the wings all this
time, grabs your attention. Grabs control.
You’re him again.
In other words, when you’re The Skinny Guy you’re always making
promises for The Fat Guy to keep.
And when you’re The Fat Guy, you’re always making promises for The
Skinny Guy to keep.
Is it any wonder we have such a tough time keeping our commitments to
ourselves?
It’s not that we’re indecisive or unreliable; it’s that each and every one of
us is a whole set of different personalities, each with his own interests and
way of doing things. Asking any one of them to defer to any of the others is
inviting a battle or even a full-scale war.
Anyone who has ever experienced the conflict between The Fat Guy and
The Skinny Guy (and haven’t we all?) knows what I mean. You can’t be
both; one of them has to lose. And they both know it.
Well, that’s the kind of war going on inside the owner of every small
business.
But it’s a three-way battle between The Entrepreneur, The Manager, and
The Technician.
Unfortunately, it’s a battle no one can win.
Understanding the differences between them will quickly explain why.
The Entrepreneur
The entrepreneurial personality turns the most trivial condition into an
exceptional opportunity. The Entrepreneur is the visionary in us. The
dreamer. The energy behind every human activity. The imagination that
sparks the fire of the future. The catalyst for change.
The Entrepreneur lives in the future, never in the past, rarely in the
present. He’s happiest when left free to construct images of “what-if” and “if-
when.”
In science, the entrepreneurial personality works in the most abstract and
least pragmatic areas of particle physics, pure mathematics, and theoretical
astronomy. In art, it thrives in the rarefied arena of the avant-garde. In
business, The Entrepreneur is the innovator, the grand strategist, the creator
of new methods for penetrating or creating new markets, the world-bending

--- page 26 ---
giant—like Sears Roebuck, Henry Ford, Tom Watson of IBM, and Ray Kroc
of McDonald’s.
The Entrepreneur is our creative personality—always at its best dealing
with the unknown, prodding the future, creating probabilities out of
possibilities, engineering chaos into harmony.
Every strong entrepreneurial personality has an extraordinary need for
control. Living as he does in the visionary world of the future, he needs
control of people and events in the present so that he can concentrate on his
dreams.
Given his need for change, The Entrepreneur creates a great deal of havoc
around him, which is predictably unsettling for those he enlists in his
projects.
As a result, he often finds himself rapidly outdistancing the others.
The farther ahead he is, the greater the effort required to pull his cohorts
along.
This then becomes the entrepreneurial worldview: a world made up of
both an overabundance of opportunities and dragging feet.
The problem is, how can he pursue the opportunities without getting
mired down by the feet?
The way he usually chooses is to bully, harass, excoriate, flatter, cajole,
scream, and finally, when all else fails, promise whatever he must to keep the
project moving.
To The Entrepreneur, most people are problems that get in the way of the
dream.
The Manager
The managerial personality is pragmatic. Without The Manager there
would be no planning, no order, no predictability.
The Manager is the part of us that goes to Sears and buys stacking plastic
boxes, takes them back to the garage, and systematically stores all the various
sized nuts, bolts, and screws in their own carefully identified drawer. He then
hangs all of the tools in impeccable order on the walls—lawn tools on one
wall, carpentry tools on another—and, to be absolutely certain that order is
not disturbed, paints a picture of each tool on the wall where it hangs!
If The Entrepreneur lives in the future, The Manager lives in the past.
Where The Entrepreneur craves control, The Manager craves order.

--- page 27 ---
Where The Entrepreneur thrives on change, The Manager compulsively
clings to the status quo.
Where The Entrepreneur invariably sees the opportunity in events, The
Manager invariably sees the problems.
The Manager builds a house and then lives in it, forever.
The Entrepreneur builds a house and the instant it’s done begins planning
the next one.
The Manager creates neat, orderly rows of things. The Entrepreneur
creates the things The Manager puts in rows.
The Manager is the one who runs after The Entrepreneur to clean up the
mess. Without The Entrepreneur there would be no mess to clean up.
Without The Manager, there could be no business, no society. Without
The Entrepreneur, there would be no innovation.
It is the tension between The Entrepreneur’s vision and The Manager’s
pragmatism that creates the synthesis from which all great works are born.
The Technician
The Technician is the doer.
“If you want it done right, do it yourself” is The Technician’s credo.
The Technician loves to tinker. Things are to be taken apart and put back
together again. Things aren’t supposed to be dreamed about, they’re
supposed to be done.
If The Entrepreneur lives in the future and The Manager lives in the past,
The Technician lives in the present. He loves the feel of things and the fact
that things can get done.
As long as The Technician is working, he is happy, but only on one thing
at a time. He knows that two things can’t get done simultaneously; only a
fool would try. So he works steadily and is happiest when he is in control of
the work flow.
As a result, The Technician mistrusts those he works for, because they are
always trying to get more work done than is either possible or necessary.
To The Technician, thinking is unproductive unless it’s thinking about the
work that needs to be done.
As a result, he is suspicious of lofty ideas or abstractions.
Thinking isn’t work; it gets in the way of work.
The Technician isn’t interested in ideas; he’s interested in “how to do it.”

--- page 28 ---
To The Technician, all ideas need to be reduced to methodology if they
are to be of any value. And with good reason.
The Technician knows that if it weren’t for him, the world would be in
more trouble than it already is. Nothing would get done, but lots of people
would be thinking about it.
Put another way, while The Entrepreneur dreams, The Manager frets, and
The Technician ruminates.
The Technician is a resolute individualist, standing his ground, producing
today’s bread to eat at tonight’s dinner. He is the backbone of every cultural
tradition, but most importantly, of ours. If The Technician didn’t do it, it
wouldn’t get done.
Everyone gets in The Technician’s way.
The Entrepreneur is always throwing a monkey wrench into his day with
the creation of yet another “great new idea.”
On the other hand, The Entrepreneur is always creating new and
interesting work for The Technician to do, thus establishing a potentially
symbiotic relationship.
Unfortunately, it rarely works out that way.
Since most entrepreneurial ideas don’t work in the real world, The
Technician’s usual experience is one of frustration and annoyance at being
interrupted in the course of doing what needs to be done to try something
new that probably doesn’t need to be done at all.
The Manager is also a problem to The Technician because he is
determined to impose order on The Technician’s work, to reduce him to a
part of “the system.”
But being a rugged individualist, The Technician can’t stand being treated
that way.
To The Technician, “the system” is dehumanizing, cold, antiseptic, and
impersonal. It violates his individuality.
Work is what a person does. And to the degree that it’s not, work
becomes something foreign.
To The Manager, however, work is a system of results in which The
Technician is but a component part.
To The Manager, then, The Technician becomes a problem to be
managed. To The Technician, The Manager becomes a meddler to be
avoided.
To both of them, The Entrepreneur is the one who got them into trouble in

--- page 29 ---
the first place!
The fact of the matter is that we all have an Entrepreneur, Manager, and
Technician inside us. And if they were equally balanced, we’d be describing
an incredibly competent individual.
The Entrepreneur would be free to forge ahead into new areas of interest;
The Manager would be solidifying the base of operations; and The
Technician would be doing the technical work.
Each would derive satisfaction from the work he does best, serving the
whole in the most productive way.
Unfortunately, our experience shows us that few people who go into
business are blessed with such a balance. Instead, the typical small business
owner is only 10 percent Entrepreneur, 20 percent Manager, and 70 percent
Technician.
The Entrepreneur wakes up with a vision.
The Manager screams “Oh, no!”
And while the two of them are battling it out, The Technician seizes the
opportunity to go into business for himself.
Not to pursue the entrepreneurial dream, however, but to finally wrest
control of his work from the other two.
To The Technician it’s a dream come true. The Boss is dead.
But to the business it’s a disaster, because the wrong person is at the
helm.
The Technician is in charge!
Sarah looked a little overwhelmed.
“I don’t understand,” she said. “How could I have done this differently?
The only reason I went into this business was because I loved baking pies. If
it hadn’t been for that, what would have been the point?” She watched my
face suspiciously, as though I were trying to make her already impossible
situation even more impossible.
“Well, let’s think about it together,” I answered.
“If it’s true that within each businessperson there are three personalities,
rather than just one, can you imagine what a mess that makes? If one of you
wants this, and another of you wants that, and a third wants something
entirely different, can you imagine the confusion that causes in our lives?

--- page 30 ---
And it’s not only the personalities inside each one of us that confuse us but
all the others we come into contact with as well: in our customers, in our
employees, in our children, in our partners, in our parents, in our friends, in
our spouses, in our lovers. If this is true, and all you need to do to discover
whether it is or not is to take a look at yourself from day to day, as though
from above, as though from outside of your skin, as though you were
watching someone else—that is, to observe yourself as you go through the
day—you would see the different parts come out. You would see them
playing their respective games. You would see how they fight for their own
space—and the space of all the others—and sabotage each other as best they
can.
“In your business, you would see how one part of you craves a sense of
order, while another part of you dreams about the future. You would see how
another part of you can’t stand being idle, and jumps in to bake, and to clean
up, and to wait on customers, the part of you who feels guilty if she isn’t
doing something all the time.
“In short, you would see how The Entrepreneur in you dreams and
schemes, The Manager in you is constantly attempting to keep things as they
are, and The Technician in you drives the other two crazy. You would see
that it not only matters that your personalities are not in a balanced
relationship with each other but that your life depends on gaining that
balance. That until you do, it’s a war! And it’s a war no one can win.
“You would also see that one of your personalities is the strongest of the
three (or four, or five, or six), and that she always manages to control the
others. In fact, if you watch long enough, you’ll begin to understand how
devastating the tyranny of your strongest personality is to your life. And
you’ll see that without balance, without all three of these personalities being
given the opportunity, the freedom, the nourishment they each need to grow,
your business cannot help but mirror your own lopsidedness.
“So it is that an entrepreneurial business, without a Manager to give it
order and without a Technician to put it to work, is doomed to suffer an early,
and probably very dramatic, death. And that a Manager-driven business,
without an Entrepreneur or a Technician to play their absolutely critical roles,
will put things into little gray boxes over and over again, only to realize too
late that there’s no reason for the things or the boxes she put them into! Such
a business will die very neatly.
“And that in a Technician-driven business, without The Entrepreneur to

--- page 31 ---
lead her and The Manager to supervise her, The Technician will work until
she drops, only to wake up the next morning to go to work even harder, and
the next, and the next. Only to discover, long after it’s too late, that while she
was working someone moved a freeway through the store!”
Sarah looked at me with uncertainty.
“But, I’m not an Entrepreneur,” she said.
“All I do is bake pies. All I ever wanted to do was to bake pies, just like
The Technician you described. When entrepreneurial personalities were
passed out, I think I got passed over. What do I do if there is no Entrepreneur
in me?”
I couldn’t help but smile. This was going to be fun. Because I knew when
Sarah finally got it—and I knew she would—she was going to discover
someone in herself she never knew was there.
“Before we reach that conclusion, Sarah, let’s look more closely at what
an Entrepreneur does,” I responded.
“An Entrepreneur does the work of envisioning the business as something
apart from you, the owner. The work of asking all the right questions about
why this business, as opposed to that business? Why a pie baking business
rather than a body shop? If you are a baker of pies, it’s easy for you to decide
to open up a pie-baking business. But that’s just the point. If you are a baker
of pies and are determined to do entrepreneurial work, you would leave your
pie-baking experience behind you and engage in the internal dialogue with
which every truly entrepreneurial personality is wonderfully familiar.
“You would begin to say to yourself, ‘It’s time for me to create a new life.
It’s time for me to challenge my imagination and to begin the process of
shaping an entirely new life. And the best way to do that anywhere in this
whole wide opportunity-filled world is to create an exciting new business.
One that can give me everything that I want, one that doesn’t require me to
be there all the time, one that has the potential to be stunningly unique, one
that people will talk about long after having shopped in it the very first time,
and, as a result of that delightful experience, will come back to shop there
again because it has such a special flavor to it. I wonder what that business
would be?’
“I wonder what that business would be?” I said to Sarah, “is the truly
entrepreneurial question. The dreaming question, I call it. It’s the question
that is at the heart of the work of an Entrepreneur. I wonder. I wonder. I
wonder.

--- page 32 ---
“So the work of an Entrepreneur is to wonder,” I continued. “To imagine
and to dream. To see with as much of herself as she can muster the
possibilities that waft about in midair someplace there above her head and
within her heart. Not in the past but in the future. That’s the work the
entrepreneurial personality does at the outset of her business and at each and
every stage along the way. I wonder. I wonder. I wonder. Just as every
inventor must. Just as every composer must. Just as every artist, or every
craftsperson, or every physicist must. Just as every baker of pies must. I call
it Future Work. ‘I wonder’ is the true work of the entrepreneurial
personality.”
She tried to repress it, but I saw a small smile begin to form on Sarah’s
mouth.
“How could I do this differently,” she finally asked me with growing
confidence. “If I were to give the true entrepreneur in myself life, how could I
totally change my experience of this business?”
“Now you’ve got it!” I said. “That’s just the right question. And to get to
the answer, let’s look at where your business exists today in the small
business life cycle.”