# Chapter 12: Your Primary Aim
book: TheEMythRevisited
pages: 107-116
section_id: chapter-12

--- page 107 ---
12
YOUR PRIMARY AIM
The chief characteristic of the volitional act is the existence of a
purpose to be achieved; the clear vision of an aim.
Robert Assagioli
The Act of Will
I doubt that by now you’d be surprised to find out that I don’t believe your
business to be the first order of business on our agenda.
You are.
Nor will you be surprised to hear that I don’t believe your business is
your life, though it does and can play a significantly important role in your
life.
But before you can determine what that role will be, you must ask
yourself these questions: What do I value most? What kind of life do I want?
What do I want my life to look like, to feel like? Who do I wish to be?
Your Primary Aim is the answer to all these questions.
Consider it from another perspective.
I’d like you to imagine that you are about to attend one of the most
important occasions of your life.
It will be held in a room sufficiently large to seat all of your friends, your
family, your business associates—anyone and everyone to whom you are
important and who is important to you.
Can you see it?

--- page 108 ---
The walls are draped with deep golden tapestries. The lighting is subdued,
soft, casting a warm glow on the faces of your expectant guests. Their chairs
are handsomely upholstered in a golden fabric that matches the tapestries.
The golden carpeting is deeply piled.
At the front of the room is a dais, and on the dais a large, beautifully
decorated table, with candles burning at either end.
On the table, in the center, is the object of everyone’s attention. A large,
shining, ornate box. And in the box is…you! Stiff as the proverbial board.
Do you see yourself lying in the box, not a dry eye in the room?
Now, listen.
From the four corners of the room comes a tape recording of your voice.
Can you hear it? You’re addressing your guests. You’re telling them the story
of your life.
How would you like that story to go?
That’s your Primary Aim.
What would you like to be able to say about your life after it’s too late to
do anything about it?
That’s your Primary Aim.
If you were to write a script for the tape to be played for the mourners at
your funeral, how would you like it to read?
That’s your Primary Aim.
And once you’ve created the script, all you need to do is make it come
true.
All you need to do is begin living your life as if it were important.
All you need to do is take your life seriously.
To create it intentionally.
To actively make your life into the life you wish it to be.
Simple? Yes.
Easy? No.
But absolutely essential if your business is to have any meaning beyond
work.
Because if your business is going to become an integral part of that tape,
if your business is going to make a major contribution to the realization of
your dream, if your business is going to become a significant component of
your Primary Aim, you have to let your business know what that Aim is!
And how can you expect to do that, if you don’t know what it is?
Do you see why your Primary Aim is so important to the success of your

--- page 109 ---
business?
With no clear picture of how you wish your life to be, how on earth can
you begin to live it?
How would you know what first step to take?
How would you measure your progress?
How would you know where you were?
How would you know how far you had gone?
How would you know how much farther you had yet to go?
Without your Primary Aim, you wouldn’t. Indeed, you couldn’t. It would
be virtually impossible.
As with Mature companies, I believe great people to be those who know
how they got where they are, and what they need to do to get where they’re
going.
Great people have a vision of their lives that they practice emulating each
and every day.
They go to work on their lives, not just in their lives.
Their lives are spent living out the vision they have of their future, in the
present. They compare what they’ve done with what they intended to do. And
where there’s a disparity between the two, they don’t wait very long to make
up the difference.
They go to work on their lives, not just in their lives.
I believe it’s true that the difference between great people and everyone
else is that great people create their lives actively, while everyone else is
created by their lives, passively waiting to see where life takes them next.
The difference between the two is the difference between living fully and
just existing.
The difference between the two is living intentionally and living by
accident.
Let me repeat once more that great quote by Don Juan in Carlos
Castaneda’s A Separate Peace: “The difference between a warrior and an
ordinary man is that a warrior sees everything as a challenge, while an
ordinary man sees everything as either a blessing or a curse.”
So before you start your business, or before you return to it tomorrow, ask
yourself the following questions:
• What do I wish my life to look like?
• How do I wish my life to be on a day-to-day basis?

--- page 110 ---
• What would I like to be able to say I truly know in my life, about my
life?
• How would I like to be with other people in my life—my family, my
friends, my business associates, my customers, my employees, my
community?
• How would I like people to think about me?
• What would I like to be doing two years from now? Ten years from
now? Twenty years from now? When my life comes to a close?
• What specifically would I like to learn during my life—spiritually,
physically, financially, technically, intellectually? About relationships?
• How much money will I need to do the things I wish to do? By when
will I need it?
These are just a few of the questions you might ask yourself in the
creation of your Primary Aim.
The answers become the standards against which you can begin to
measure your life’s progress. In the absence of such standards, your life will
drift aimlessly, without purpose, without meaning.
In that regard, your Primary Aim is the vision necessary to bring your
business to life and your life to your business.
It provides you with a purpose.
It provides you with energy.
It provides you with the grist for your day-to-day mill.
“That’s what’s been missing in my business,” Sarah all but shouted. “Me!
How could I have been so oblivious to something so obvious?”
“Don’t be so hard on yourself,” I said. “We are all oblivious. Join the
club. Let me tell you a story.
“There was once a young man who had recently turned forty whose life
seemed to be going nowhere. Somehow he had never grabbed hold of a
career. His life had no purpose. College had somehow eluded him. In his first
year at UCLA, he couldn’t find anything to hold his attention and he quit. He
studied music—many said brilliantly—as a boy, but in his early adult years
failed to find the conviction he needed to pursue it.
“Many different things attracted him—music, religion, mysticism, writing
poetry, drugs, writing pulp fiction, money—none of them permanently. He
took whatever jobs came along, and, because of his natural and varied talents,

--- page 111 ---
he did whatever he did well, but even then none of the jobs turned into
anything with a future, at least not a future that attracted him. After leaving
college at midterm, he drove to New York City to study art, quickly changed
his mind, and joined the Army, which sent him to Korea. His father died
suddenly, bringing him home to care for his mother and two younger
siblings.
“Some time after, he met an exciting woman, took off to Europe where
they traveled from country to country on a motor scooter, and where he
played saxophone and drew religious figures on the streets in front of
cathedrals to earn enough money to eat. Finally out of money and tired of the
game, he and his woman friend were repatriated by the U.S. government and
returned to New York City where they contracted to drive a New York City
yellow cab to L.A. to deliver it to its new owner.
“When he was twenty-five, they married, had two children, moved to San
Francisco, where the young man sold encyclopedias for a living, played
saxophone on occasion, and became over time less young. Their life was a
running battle. Eventually, after one too many rages about his wife’s abuse of
alcohol, her infidelity, and his lack of purpose, the whole thing came
tumbling down into divorce.
“He immediately met a much younger woman, whose eyes shined like his
ex-wife’s didn’t, who read his poetry and was touched by it, who listened to
his music and was awed by it, was satisfied just to sit by his side, no
questions asked. And though he continued to sell encyclopedias, and though
his heartfelt need for connecting with something that smacked of purpose
continued to pain him privately throughout all of this, his life took a more
positive turn with this new young woman who eventually became his second
wife.
“He went back to college, left the book business, studied contracting and
construction so he could work with his hands rather than his mouth, moved
with his new, willing wife to southern California, and maneuvered himself
into framing jobs from which he was fired time after time until he learned
how to pull it off.
“By this time, he was a man in his late thirties beginning to do work that
kids twenty years younger than him did. They regarded him on the job as
something of a freak. His beard by now was down to his chest, his hair hung
down over his shoulders; he wrote poetry at night, played jazz on the
weekend, ate burritos with the Mexicans on the job, smoked dope in the

--- page 112 ---
evenings, and dreamed crazily about the future when he and his young wife
would buy twenty acres in Mendocino County, build their own house with
their own hands, raise a family, and have his two girls from his first marriage
move in with them when everything was ready.
“They had a tiny one-bedroom house in Santa Ana, California, drove a
’52 Chevy pickup, and along with their Great Dane named Dan and a little
black poodle named Murray, they lived in a sense-steaming daze that seemed
at the time close to what the perfect life must be like.
“But, as with all good things, this too came to an end, when our young
man, turning older, pursued by the demons of some indefinable muse,
decided to move back north, now that they had their act together, saved up
enough from living the right life, hands crusted and gnarly from ‘honest’
work, body brown and beautiful from putting his muscles on the line, brain
filled with the poetry he had written, the music he had renewed, and the dope
he had smoked, knowing that it was time to become the contractor he had set
out to become three years before, and that all it would take was one sizable
kick to get them moving toward what he knew would be the fine resolution of
his up-to-now raggedy search.
“He and his wife and his Great Dane, Dan, and his poodle named Murray,
plus whatever else they had accumulated in the few years he spent working
with his hands rather than his mouth in southern California, piled it all up in
the ’52 Chevy pickup and moved back to the San Francisco they had come
from not that long before.
“It was then that the big shift took place and the unpredictable happened.
Our now thirty-eighty-year-old hero and his young wife, along with the dogs
and the pickup, were invited to move in temporarily with his sister and her
husband while negotiating the purchase of their ‘Mendocino Acres.’ His
brother-in-law had the idea that our hero would do well consulting—in the
area in which he was a tested expert, sales—with his advertising agency’s hi-
tech small business clients, until such time, of course, that our hero settled
down with his young bride on their ‘Mendocino Acres’ to follow his true
calling.
“Understand, everyone knew that that was going to happen. Nobody
doubted it. Full of the robust idealism that had marked his youthful passing,
he was, without any doubt whatsoever, going to realize his vision; the twenty
acres were all but his—it simply required the doing. Of course, there was also
the contractor’s license and the money, but no one thought that any of that

--- page 113 ---
would prove insurmountable.
“After all, here was a man who had lived a life that baffled good reason.
Whatever he chose to do, he did. Whatever he did, he was good at. No matter
that once he did it, he grew tired of it. He chose to do that, too. To his friends
and his family he was, if not unexplainable, certainly someone to be noticed,
at times in amazement, and at times with pity; but, never without awe,
because who knew what this man was going to do next? And somehow, they
all, in their own private way, envied him! Can you believe that? They envied
him because he seemed so free! Despite the perpetual trouble he found
himself in. Despite his lack of direction. Despite his whimsical and
sometimes dangerous philosophy, there was no denying it, this man, although
getting older, sometimes precipitously, was living a romantic adventure they
write movies about, or, if not that, a pitiful tragedy.
“By anyone’s standards, he was living pretty close to the edge. Here’s a
guy on the cusp of middle age with a long beard, a young wife, two dogs, and
a pickup, without a home of their own, living with family, searching for
property they couldn’t possibly afford, with hardly a thought in his head that
anything was wrong at all with this picture, about to step on those moving
stairs to somewhere that he was totally unprepared for.
“And take the step he did. And it was a stunner! He was, thanks to his
brother-in-law’s good intentions, suddenly set adrift in a world that could
have been another planet for all he knew. In Silicon Valley. Calling on
techies who owned businesses whose names he couldn’t even pronounce at
first attempt, making stuff he didn’t even know existed. He was
dumbfounded by the magnitude of his ignorance. And yet, something called
him to stay. They asked him, ‘How can you help me?’ He answered, ‘I don’t
know.’ They asked him, ‘What do you know about my business?’ He
answered, ‘Nothing.’ They looked at him for a long time. He sat and looked
back, and just thought. They said to him, ‘Why don’t you come back after
you’ve had some time to think about it.’ He said he would. And he did.
Because he knew something was there.
“Understand, here’s a guy who had been selling encyclopedias to people
at night, in front of their television sets, or on the dining room table.
Watching their faces suspiciously regard him as someone who came out of
the night, until he spread out the encyclopedia and the vividly colored panels
that showed all the books graphically alive: the maps, the transparencies of
the human body, the endless list of topics, of wonders the world withheld

--- page 114 ---
from them in their ordinary lives, the promise to their children, even their
children to come, of education, of knowledge, of information, long before the
Information Age had arrived.
“Here their eyes would awaken and lighten up to all these colorful
pictures of what was possible, and now, almost within their reach, pending a
decision. He had done that late at night, grinding away in front of Frank and
Marge until finally Frank, with his last breath, would say sort of covertly,
‘Well, Marge, whad’ya think? Think we should do it?’ And he would sit
there, our thirty-something hero, waiting without a movement, without a
whisper of encouragement to Marge, let alone to Frank, waiting for the
inevitable ‘yes’ or ‘no,’ either of which would turn him back out into the
night to, if he was lucky, go another round, at Ben and Mary’s, with all the
little kids hanging on the pictures and making messes on his laminated plates.
“To this guy, this world, this Silicon Valley, was a miracle! ‘And I get to
do this during the day?!’ And so, visit them he would. All the while feeling
stupid, knowing nothing about their world, or their business, or the little
weird things they made there, the little black boxes with their arcane
significance so far beyond his experience of coffee tables and poetry and
music and framing and pitching and closing, this intricate little world of
theirs that lived in some cubicle inside of their foreign, tight, screwy little
brains. And yet, intuitively, he knew that he knew something that they
needed. He knew that there was something waiting there for him, something
his peculiar life had—in some strange, inexplicable way—prepared him for,
something only someone who had lived in such an unconscious, cataclysmic,
totally disorganized, yet always passionate state, doing this and that, could
fully appreciate.
“And it was then that the curtain lifted. The curtain between the world
that was theirs and the world that was his. But most of all, the curtain that
stood between himself and himself, the curtain that separated him from his
life.
“It was then that he realized with a suddenness that made him giddy that,
while he didn’t understand their business, neither did they! And in that one
shuddering instant of truth our hero was reborn. He discovered an entirely
new life.
“And with the discovery of his new life, there came for the very first time
in his life the beginning of some purpose: to never let the curtain down again,
to never allow the curtain to cover what was hiding there behind it. That the

--- page 115 ---
world was nothing like he had believed it to be. That no one knew what he
had believed they knew. That everything was just like he had thought it was,
a mystery, but that he wasn’t the only one who didn’t know what was going
on. What he learned in Silicon Valley is that no one knew what was going
on! It was completely open to interpretation. And his guess was as good as
anyone’s. My God, probably even better.
“After all, he had met Frank and Marge face-to-face. He had survived the
worst of the worst confrontations. He had even been attacked by a German
shepherd dog while he was attempting to make his final close. Right across
the kitchen table! Who in Silicon Valley could say that? And live to tell about
it. Yo, and he had even made the sale! Walked out with a torn contract in
hand and a check. Who said little black boxes were dangerous? Who said
there was anything to fear, anything he couldn’t understand?”
I stopped long enough to feel how much this story had touched Sarah and
how much she wanted to ask the obvious question, but I had to finish, so I
went on.
“And so that chapter of our hero’s life was closed and a new chapter
opened. He moved into his early forties and the end of his second marriage,
which also, by this time, had produced a child—his third daughter—another
love of his life who could not, as no child can ever do, repair a broken
marriage. During the years that followed, he became about the best anyone
could be in his now chosen profession. He learned the secrets he thought
were hidden. He married a woman far bigger than the others, had two more
children, fought battles with his ignorance at times titanic in scope, moved
through one obstacle after another, wrote books, spoke throughout the world,
built a great business, only to watch it almost fail, persisted in building it up
again, lanced, jabbed, wrestled, grappled, laughed, sang, loved, and roared,
and through it all, remembered one simple thing that meant more to him than
anything else he had ever thought: the curtain, the curtain. Keep the curtain
up at all cost.
“Because it is the curtain that kept him shrouded in darkness. And it’s the
darkness that holds out the light. It is the light, the openness, the clearing of
all the obstacles to knowing that had become his true purpose: to be open. To
be awake, to be available to what’s really going on, to give up false beliefs.
“And for only one reason: his life was at stake!
“And that’s the point, Sarah.
“It’s not your business you have to fear losing. It’s something much

--- page 116 ---
bigger than that. It’s your Self.
“And that’s what this whole thing is about.
“What truths are your curtain hiding from you? What misunderstanding
keeps you where you are, in the past, in the dark, shrouded in your limited
beliefs, shrinking from the world, from the light on the other side of the
curtain?
“Until you lift the curtain, Sarah, until you dare to pull the mask off the
world’s face, until you move beyond your Comfort Zone, you will never
know what it is you were missing out there.
“It’s you, Sarah. It’s you that’s waiting out there for you to find on the
other side of the curtain.
“I know, Sarah, because the man I’ve been telling you about is me. When
the curtain lifted, I learned something.
“That there’s no one else out there but you!”