# Foreword
pages: 6-9
section_id: foreword

--- page 6 ---
FOREWORD
It has been fifteen years since The E-Myth was first published. In my case,
fifteen full years. A lot has happened in the interim—with my family, my
business, my life. Many wonderful things, many good things, many painful
things. And, if it’s true what Don Juan said in Tales of Power, that “The basic
difference between an ordinary man and a warrior is that a warrior takes
everything as a challenge while an ordinary man takes everything either as a
blessing or a curse,” then I am as guilty of being an ordinary man as the next
guy, and, on occasion, have ascended to the warrior state when God saw fit to
provide me with the power.
In these fifteen years, I have experienced near financial and business
disaster as well as incredible victories; have built a 16-year marriage into an
exquisite partnership with my wife, Ilene; have become the father of two
extraordinary children, Sam and Alex Olivia (the total is now five, ages nine
years to thirty-eight years); have entered the anointed state of
grandfatherhood thanks to my daughter Kim and my son-in-law John, who
have blessed us with Sarah, Elijah, Noah, Hannah, and Isaiah; have traveled
throughout the world speaking to hundreds of thousands of small business
owners in Australia, Canada, Spain, New Zealand, Japan, Puerto Rico,
Mexico, Indonesia, and, of course, in almost every major city in the United
States. And, through it all, I have been the grateful recipient of unrestrained
support and caring from many of those whose lives I have in some way
managed to touch and whose paths I have crossed.
In short, the years have been exhilarating, challenging, frustrating,
exhausting, debilitating, boring, enlightening, rewarding, and, after all is said
and done, a handful for anyone, especially for a guy my age with a penchant
for going to the wall without concern for the damage I do to the leading parts
of my body.
This book, then, is a product of the last fifteen years, as well as a product
of the fifteen years that preceded them. It was almost exactly eight years
before The E-Myth was published that I founded our company, E-Myth
Worldwide, which has provided the fuel and experience for the point of view

--- page 7 ---
I have shared with those of you who have read The E-Myth, and with those of
you who are about to read this book.
In the years since The E-Myth was published, many of my readers—as
well as many of our small business clients—have asked me to clarify specific
aspects of The E-Myth point of view so they could better apply it to their
businesses. This book answers many questions that The E-Myth has raised
over the years, offering both new and previous readers the opportunity to
approach their businesses with renewed vigor and a sharpened mindset
through an expanded experience of The E-Myth principles.
Toward that end, I have attempted to answer the most important questions
I have been asked about the principles covered in each chapter by means of a
running dialogue with a wonderful woman named Sarah (not her real name)
with whom I’ve spent quite a bit of time over the past year. Sarah’s
experience in business, her patience, intelligence, and passion have helped
me to address the challenging issues of our small business clients in the
reorganization of their minds as well as their businesses. It is in response to
Sarah’s frustrations, and her very personal inquiry, that I have endeavored to
clarify for the reader the E-Myth Point of View. I hope that Sarah and her
questions are as engaging to you as they have been to me.
But, before I introduce you to Sarah, I’d like to share with you some
thoughts about small businesses and the people who own them.
The question has often been asked of me, “What do the owners of
extraordinary businesses know that the rest don’t?”
Contrary to popular belief, my experience has shown me that the people
who are exceptionally good in business aren’t so because of what they know
but because of their insatiable need to know more.
The problem with most failing businesses I’ve encountered is not that
their owners don’t know enough about finance, marketing, management, and
operations—they don’t, but those things are easy enough to learn—but that
they spend their time and energy defending what they think they know. The
greatest businesspeople I’ve met are determined to get it right no matter what
the cost.
And by getting it right, I’m not just talking about the business.
I mean that there is something uplifting, some vision, some higher end in
sight that “getting it right” would serve.
An ethical certainty, a moral principle, a universal truth.
Which is not to say that those I’m inclined to think of as extraordinary

--- page 8 ---
would necessarily communicate it that way. Many can’t. Even if they had the
inclination, they simply don’t have the words for it. But it’s still there all the
same. You can see it in their eyes, feel it radiating from their bodies, hear it in
the timbre of their voices.
On the other hand, notwithstanding the search for “something higher,” the
best of the best I have known are extraordinarily grounded people; they are
compulsive about detail, pragmatic, down-to-earth, in touch with the seamy
reality of ordinary life. They know that a business doesn’t miss the mark by
failing to achieve greatness in some lofty, principled way, but in the stuff that
goes on in every nook and cranny of the business—on the telephone, between
the customer and a salesperson, on the shipping dock, at the cash register.
And so the great ones I have known seem to possess an intuitive
understanding that the only way to reach something higher is to focus their
attention on the multitude of seemingly insignificant, unimportant, and boring
things that make up every business. (And that make up every life, for that
matter!)
Those mundane and tedious little things that, when done exactly right,
with the right kind of attention and intention, form in their aggregate a
distinctive essence, an evanescent quality that distinguishes every great
business you’ve ever done business with from its more mediocre counterparts
whose owners are satisfied to simply get through the day.
Yes, the simple truth about the greatest businesspeople I have known is
that they have a genuine fascination for the truly astonishing impact little
things done exactly right can have on the world.
It is to that fascination that this book is dedicated.
This book is a guide for those who see the development of an
extraordinary business as a never-ending inquiry, an ongoing investigation,
an active engagement with a world of forces, within us and without, that
continually amaze and confound the true seekers among us with awesome
variety, unending surprises, and untold complexity.
While it may seem obvious, this fascination with the development of an
extraordinary business is not the same as a fascination with success.
Certainly not the success we normally think of. Some end point which,
having reached it, enables one to say, “I did it!” Because my experience has
taught me only too well that end points in the development of an
extraordinary business are instantly replaced by beginning points.
So, this book is not about endings, but about beginnings, about the never-

--- page 9 ---
ending game, the delightful and exhilarating process, the continuous
evolution of our senses, of our consciousness—of our humanness—which
only comes from being present in the moment, from being attentive to what’s
going on.
I believe that our business can provide us with a mirror to see ourselves as
we are, to see what we truly know and what we don’t know, to see ourselves
honestly, directly, and immediately.
I believe that our business can become an exciting metaphor for “The
Way.”
A wise person once said, “Know thyself.” To that honorable dictum I can
only add for the businessperson on the path of discovery, good traveling and
good luck.
I might also add a few instructive words from another wise man, Anthony
Greenbank, who said in The Book of Survival, “To live through an impossible
situation, you don’t need the reflexes of a Grand Prix driver, the muscles of a
Hercules, the mind of an Einstein. You simply need to know what to do.”
Good reading.
Michael E. Gerber
Santa Rosa, California
June, 2001