# Afterword
book: TheEMythRevisited
pages: 204-210
section_id: afterword

--- page 204 ---
AFTERWORD
TAKING THE FIRST STEP
So now what do you do?
Now that the fire is burning. Now that you want to get started. Now that
you want to turn your business into a little “money machine,” a turn-key
operation.
Well, like Sarah, and thousands of small business owners just like her,
you must take the first step.
You must step back from your business and look at it through your new
E-Myth eyes.
You must analyze your business as it is today, decide what it must look
like when you’ve finally got it just like you want it, and then determine the
gap between where you are and where you need to be in order to make your
dream a reality.
That gap will tell you exactly what needs to be done to create the business
of your dreams.
And what you’ll discover when you look at your business through your E-
Myth eyes is that the gap is always created by the absence of systems, the
absence of a proprietary way of doing business that successfully
differentiates your business from everyone else’s.
Since The E-Myth first appeared in 1986, we at E-Myth Worldwide have
assisted thousands of small-business owners in taking that first step back
from their businesses to discover what the gap was in each of their cases.
We would love to do the same for you. It begins with our invitation to
take part in our free E-Myth experience. You will learn how to cross the
bridge from where you are to where you want to be in your business, your
life, and your future. The E-Myth experience will take you to a place you
have never been before, and it will feel like home.
To take your first step, simply complete the form at the back of this book
and follow the instructions provided.

--- page 205 ---
And remember…
When you hear something, you forget it.
When you see something, you remember it.
But not until you do something will you understand it.
Let’s get started.
Michael E. Gerber
E-Myth Worldwide
Santa Rosa, California
June, 2001

--- page 206 ---
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
MICHAEL E. GERBER is the Founder, Chairman and CEO of E-Myth
Worldwide, the company he founded in 1977 to provide small-business
owners and entrepreneurs with the help they need to build a business that
works. Since then, E-Myth Worldwide has provided more than 25,000 small
and emerging business-owner clients with the means to radically transform
their businesses and their lives. It is fast becoming world-wide the largest and
most effective small-business development resource of its kind.
Thought by many as “the leading voice of small-business in America,”
Michael Gerber has spoken to thousands of small-business owners, managers,
and corporate executives throughout the world about the truly profound role
the entrepreneurial perspective can play in the reinvention of the world’s
economy and culture. His message is unique, compelling, and pragmatic.
And best of all, as his thousands of readers, business clients, and seminar
participants attest, it works.
If you are interested in having Michael Gerber address your organization,
or wish to receive more information about Mr. Gerber’s innovative E-Myth
Mastery Program, books, and tapes, call Toll Free: 800-221-0266 (US &
Canada) or 707-569-5757 (worldwide). Or write to: Michael Gerber, E-Myth
Worldwide, 2235 Mercury Way, Suite 200, Santa Rosa, California, 95407.
Visit us at our Web site: www.e-myth.com or send us an email: info@e-
myth.com.
Discover great authors, exclusive offers, and more at hc.com.

--- page 207 ---
OTHER WORKS
MICHAEL E. GERBER
E-Myth Mastery
The E-Myth Manager
The E-Myth Contractor
9780061741616
The E-Myth Physician

--- page 208 ---
COPYRIGHT
THE E-MYTH REVISITED. Copyright © 2007 by Michael E. Gerber. All rights reserved under
International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. By payment of the required fees, you have
been granted the non-exclusive, non-transferable right to access and read the text of this e-book on-
screen. No part of this text may be reproduced, transmitted, downloaded, decompiled, reverse
engineered, or stored in or introduced into any information storage and retrieval system, in any form or
by any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or hereafter invented, without the express
written permission of HarperCollins e-books.
EPub © Edition MAY 2007 ISBN: 9780061741654
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Version:10042017

--- page 209 ---
BACK AD