# Chapter 16: Your People Strategy
book: TheEMythRevisited
pages: 152-166
section_id: chapter-16

--- page 152 ---
16
YOUR PEOPLE STRATEGY
Life games reflect life aims.
Robert S. DeRopp
The Master Game
How do I get my people to do what I want?” This is the one question I hear
most often from small business owners.
And the answer I invariably give them is, “You can’t! You can’t get your
people to do anything.
“If you want it done,” I tell them, “you’re going to have to create an
environment in which ‘doing it’ is more important to your people than not
doing it. Where ‘doing it’ well becomes a way of life for them.”
Since that is the question most often asked of me, I was intrigued with the
hotel Manager’s answer to my question, “How do you get your people to do
what you want?”
His response was refreshing because it is so rare that I hear something
like it.
“The first thing that surprised me when I came to work here,” the
Manager said, “was that the owner took me seriously.
“I mean, think about it. Here I was, a kid, with absolutely no experience
in this business. But he never treated me that way. He treated me as though I
were a serious adult. Somebody worth talking to about what he obviously
considered important.

--- page 153 ---
“And that was the second thing that surprised me when I came to work
here,” the Manager continued. “How seriously the Boss took the operation of
this hotel.
“I mean, it wasn’t just that he took it seriously—everyone I’ve ever
worked for was serious about his business—it was the kind of seriousness he
had.
“It was as though the hotel was more than just a hotel to him.
“It was like the hotel was an expression of who he was, a symbol of what
he believed in.
“So if I hadn’t taken the hotel seriously, it would have looked like I
wasn’t taking him seriously, as a man whose values I respected.
“I guess that’s why he took me seriously. It established a level of
communication between us that made it possible for me to listen to what he
believed in and how the hotel expressed those beliefs on a day-to-day basis.
“I’ll never forget my first day here,” he went on. “It was like I was being
initiated into a fraternity or something.
“It was right here that it happened.” He waved his arm in a circle
indicating the office in which we were sitting. “This used to be his office.
“I was sitting where you’re sitting,” he said. “And the Boss was sitting
here.” He pointed at the chair in which he was sitting.
“It was a Monday morning and they had just had a big weekend, so there
was a ton of stuff to do. Usually when I start a new job, the first thing that
happens is that the person who hires me takes a minute to describe what I’m
supposed to do and then throws me out there to do it. So I was surprised
when the Boss asked me if I wanted a cup of coffee. He seemed so unhurried,
so unbusinesslike, you might say.
“No that wasn’t it,” the Manager corrected himself.
“He was probably the most businesslike person I had ever met.
“But it was how he was about his business that struck me.
“He seemed to be saying that what we were going to talk about was the
most important thing on his agenda that day, that discussing my job was more
important to him than doing the work that was going on at the time.
“He wasn’t hiring me to work; he was hiring me to do something much
more important than that.”
The Manager smiled. “You know, I’ve never said this to anyone before.
It’s really strange, but while I’m telling you all of this, it’s becoming clear to
me why I have so much respect for this place. It’s because I have so much

--- page 154 ---
respect for the Boss. To me, the place is him. If I didn’t respect him, I don’t
think I would be as good at what I do here as I am. Somehow the idea of
what we do here is his idea. And that’s what he took so long to communicate
to me on that first day—his idea of this place. And what that meant to him.
“What he told me was something nobody has ever said to me before in
any job.
“He said, ‘The work we do is a reflection of who we are. If we’re sloppy
at it, it’s because we’re sloppy inside. If we’re late at it, it’s because we’re
late inside. If we’re bored by it, it’s because we’re bored inside, with
ourselves, not with the work. The most menial work can be a piece of art
when done by an artist. So the job here is not outside of ourselves, but inside
of ourselves. How we do our work becomes a mirror of how we are inside.’”
The Manager continued, as if the owner were talking through him. “Work
is passive without you. It can’t do anything. Work is only an idea before a
person does it. But the moment a person does it, the impact of the work on
the world becomes a reflection of that idea—the idea behind the work—as
well as the person doing it.
“In the process, the work you do becomes you. And you become the force
that breathes life into the idea behind the work.
“You become the creator of the impact on the world of the work you do.
“There is no such thing as undesirable work,” he continued. “There are
only people who see certain kinds of work as undesirable. People who use
every excuse in the world to justify why they have to do work they hate to do.
People who look upon their work as a punishment for who they are and
where they stand in the world, rather than as an opportunity to see themselves
as they really are.
“What the Boss said is that people like that don’t bring life to the idea of
the work they do; they bring death to it.
“The result of that is always what we experience as the sloppy,
inconsiderate, inconsistent, and inhuman transactions that take place between
most businesses and the people who buy from them. Exactly the opposite of
what we have here.
“And the reason it’s different here is because we give everyone who
comes to work at the hotel an opportunity to make a choice. Not after they’ve
done the work, but before.
“And we do that by making sure they understand the idea behind the work
they’re being asked to do.

--- page 155 ---
“I guess that’s what excited me most about taking this job,” said the
Manager. “It’s the very first place I’ve ever gone to work where there was an
idea behind the work that was more important than the work itself.
“The idea the Boss expressed to me was broken down into three parts:
“The first says that the customer is not always right, but whether he is or
not, it is our job to make him feel that way.
“The second says that everyone who works here is expected to work
toward being the best he can possibly be at the tasks he’s accountable for.
When he can’t do that, he should act like he is until he gets around to it. And
if he’s unwilling to act like it, he should leave.
“The third says that the business is a place where everything we know
how to do is tested by what we don’t know how to do, and that the conflict
between the two is what creates growth, what creates meaning.
“The idea the Boss has about the business comes down to one essential
notion. That a business is like a martial arts practice hall, a dojo, a place you
go to practice being the best you can be. But the true combat in a dojo is not
between one person and another as most people believe it to be. The true
combat in a martial arts practice hall is between the people within ourselves.
“That’s what the Boss and I talked about in our first meeting. His
philosophy about work and about business. I came to understand that the
hotel was the least important thing in our relationship. What was important
was how seriously I took to playing the game he had created here.
“He wasn’t looking for employees so much as for players in his game. He
was looking for people who wanted something more than just a job.”
What the Manager was telling me, and what the Boss had told him, was
that people—your people—do not simply want to work for exciting people.
They want to work for people who have created a clearly defined structure
for acting in the world. A structure through which they can test themselves
and be tested. Such a structure is called a game.
And there is nothing more exciting than a well-conceived game.
That is what the very best businesses represent to the people who create
them: a game to be played in which the rules symbolize the idea you, the
owner, have about the world.
If your idea is a positive one, your business will reflect that optimism.
If your idea is a negative one, your business will reflect that as well.
In this context, the degree to which your people “do what you want” is the
degree to which they buy into your game.

--- page 156 ---
And the degree to which they buy into your game doesn’t depend on them
but on how well you communicate the game to them—at the outset of your
relationship, not after it’s begun.
Your People Strategy is the way you communicate this idea.
It starts with your Primary Aim and your Strategic Objective, and
continues through your Organizational Strategy (your Organization Chart and
the Position Contracts for all of the positions in it) and the Operations
Manuals that define the work your people do.
It is communicated through the beliefs you have and the way you expect
your Prototype to exemplify them; through the standards you establish for the
performance of accountabilities at all levels and in all sectors of your
Prototype; through the words you use to describe what your business needs to
become—for your customer, for your people, for yourself—if it is to be more
than just a place where people go to work.
But the game your business will play can’t simply be captured on the
written page. It must be seen if it is to work. It must be experienced.
It is—first, last, and always—about how you act.
The words will become hollow if the game is a contrived one.
The game can’t be created as a device to enroll your people. It can’t
become cynical if it’s to provide your people with what they need in order to
come alive while playing it.
The game has to be real. You have to mean it.
The game is a measure of you.
How you act in the game establishes how you will be regarded by the
other players.
The Rules of the Game
As in any game, the “people game” has rules that must be honored if you
are to become any good at it.
I’ve included a few here to give you a taste for them. As for the rest of
them, you’ll have to discover them for yourself by playing a game of your
own. You’ll learn the rules in the process.
1. Never figure out what you want your people to do and then try to
create a game out of it. If it’s to be seen as serious, the game has to come

--- page 157 ---
first; what your people do, second.
2. Never create a game for your people you’re unwilling to play yourself.
They’ll find you out and never let you forget it.
3. Make sure there are specific ways of winning the game without ending
it. The game can never end because the end will take the life right out of
your business. But unless there are victories in the process, your people will
grow weary. Hence, the value of victories now and then. They keep people
in the game and make the game appealing, even when it’s not.
4. Change the game from time to time—the tactics, not the strategy. The
strategy is its ethic, the moral underpinning of your game’s logic. This must
remain sacrosanct, for it is the foundation of you and your people’s
commitment to each other. But change is necessary. For any game can
become ordinary, no matter how exhilarating it may be at the beginning.
To know when change is called for, watch your people. Their results will
tell you when the game’s all but over. The trick is to anticipate the end
before anyone else does and to change it by executive action. You’ll know
if you’ve pulled it off by watching how everyone responds to the change.
Not at first, however. You can expect some resistance at first. But persist.
Your persistence will move them through their resistance into your new and
more enlivening game.
5. Never expect the game to be self-sustaining. People need to be
reminded of it constantly. At least once a week, create a special meeting
about the game. At least once a day, make some kind of issue about an
exception to the way the game has been played—and make certain that
everyone knows about it.
Remember, in and of itself the game doesn’t exist. It is alive to the degree
that people make it so. But people have the unerring ability to forget
everything they start and to be distracted by trivia. Most great games are
lost that way. To make certain yours isn’t, don’t expect your people to be
something they’re not. Remind them, time after time, of the game they’re
playing with you. You can’t remind them too often.
6. The game has to make sense. An illogical game will abort before it ever
gets going. The best games are built on universally verifiable truths.
Everyone should be able to see them if they’re to be sufficiently attractive.
A game with muddy beginnings will get you nowhere. Know the ground
you stand on and then assemble your armament. Sooner or later you’ll need
it. For a game that isn’t tested isn’t a game at all.

--- page 158 ---
But remember, you can have the best reasons in the world for your game
and still end up with a loser if the logic is not supported by a strong
emotional commitment. All the logic does is give your people the rational
armament to support their emotional commitment. If their commitment
wanes, it means that they—and most likely, you—have forgotten the logic.
So wheel out the logic often. Make sure everyone remembers the game’s
raison d’être.
7. The game needs to be fun from time to time. Note that I said, from time
to time. No game needs to be fun all the time. In fact, a game is often no
fun at all. That’s part of the thrill of playing a game well: learning how to
deal with the “no fun” part so as to retain your dignity while falling on your
face.
At the same time, fun needs to be planned into your game. But make
certain that the fun you plan is fun. Fun needs to be defined by your people.
If it’s fun to them, it will work. But not too often, maybe once every six
months. Something to look forward to, and something to forget.
8. If you can’t think of a good game, steal one. Anyone’s ideas are as good
as your own. But once you steal somebody else’s game, learn it by heart.
There’s nothing worse than pretending to play a game.
The Logic of the Game
To the hotel Manager, the Boss’s game was a good one, so he learned
how to play it. It was a simple game, but effective. It was built on the
following logic:
Most people today are not getting what they want. Not from their jobs,
not from their families, not from their religion, not from their government,
and, most important, not from themselves.
Something is missing in most of our lives.
Part of what’s missing is purpose. Values. Worthwhile standards against
which our lives can be measured. Part of what’s missing is a Game Worth
Playing.
What’s also missing is a sense of relationship.
People suffer in isolation from one another.
In a world without purpose, without meaningful values, what have we to
share but our emptiness, the needy fragments of our superficial selves?

--- page 159 ---
As a result, most of us scramble about hungrily seeking distraction, in
music, in television, in people, in drugs.
And most of all we seek things.
Things to wear and things to do.
Things to fill the emptiness.
Things to shore up our eroding sense of self.
Things to which we can attach meaning, significance, life.
We’ve fast become a world of things. And most people are being buried
in the profusion.
What most people need, then, is a place of community that has purpose,
order, and meaning.
A place in which being human is a prerequisite, but acting human is
essential.
A place where the generally disorganized thinking that pervades our
culture becomes organized and clearly focused on a specific worthwhile
result.
A place where discipline and will become prized for what they are: the
backbone of enterprise and action, of being what you are intentionally instead
of accidentally.
A place that replaces the home most of us have lost.
That’s what a business can do; it can create a Game Worth Playing.
It can become that place of community.
It can become that place where words such as integrity, intention,
commitment, vision, and excellence can be used as action steps in the process
of producing a worthwhile result.
What kind of result?
Giving your customer a sense that your business is a special place, created
by special people, doing what they do in the best possible way.
And all being done for the simplest, most human reason possible—
because they’re alive!
What other reason do you need?
Human beings are capable of performing extraordinary acts. Capable of
going to the moon. Capable of creating the computer. Capable of building a
bomb that can destroy us all.
The least we should be able to do is run a small business that works.
For if we can’t do that, then what’s the value of our grand ideas?
What purpose do they serve but to alienate us from ourselves, from each

--- page 160 ---
other, from who we are?
Playing the Game
Thinking the way the hotel owner did, you can begin to construct a
mental map of the game he created. His hotel became a world in which the
sensory experiences of his customer were greeted by a profound dedication to
cleanliness, beauty, and order.
But this dedication didn’t rest on a purely commercial justification
(though there was that too; no business could be successful without it) but a
moral one. On the Boss’s philosophy, his view of the world, his idea.
The idea was then communicated to his people, both in word and deed,
through a well-planned process.
The importance of this cannot be overstated.
The Boss communicated his idea through documented systems and
through his warm, moving, and positive manner.
He knew that he could communicate the orderly yet human process of
pleasing customers to his people only if it were communicated to them in an
orderly and human way.
In short, the medium of communication became as important as the idea it
was designed to communicate.
And the hotel’s hiring process became the first and most essential
medium for communicating the Boss’s idea.
As the Manager explained it to me, the hiring process was comprised of
several distinct components:
1. A scripted presentation communicating the Boss’s idea in a group meeting
to all of the applicants at the same time. This presentation described not
only the idea but also the business’s history and experience in successfully
implementing that idea, and the attributes required of the successful
candidate for the position in question.
2. Meeting with each applicant individually to discuss his reactions to and
feelings about the idea, as well as his background and experience. At this
meeting, each applicant was also asked why he felt he was superbly
appropriate for the role the position was to play in implementing the Boss’s
idea.

--- page 161 ---
3. Notification of the successful candidate by telephone. Again, a scripted
presentation.
4. Notification of the unsuccessful applicants, thanking each for his interest.
A standard letter, signed by the interviewer.
5. First day of training to include the following activities for both the Boss
and the new employee:
• Reviewing the Boss’s idea
• Summarizing the system through which the entire business brings the
idea to reality
• Taking the new employee on a tour of the facilities, highlighting people
at work and systems at work to demonstrate the interdependence of the
systems on people and the people on systems
• Answering clearly and fully all the employee’s questions
• Issuing the employee his uniform and his Operations Manual
• Reviewing the Operations Manual, including the Strategic Objective,
the Organizational Strategy, and the Position Contract of the
employee’s position
• Completing the employment papers
And the hiring process is just the beginning!
Just think. All of this simply to start a relationship!
Are you beginning to understand that systematizing your business need
not be a dehumanizing experience, but quite the opposite?
That in order to get your people to do what you want, you’ll first have to
create an environment that will make it possible?
That hiring people, developing people, and keeping people requires a
strategy built on an understanding of people completely foreign to most
businesses?
That the system is indeed the solution?
That without an idea worth pursuing, there can be no People Strategy at
all?
But with that idea you can finally say, just as our young Manager said,
“That’s where we really shine!”
Management, people, systems. As I watched Sarah take all this in, I saw that
the idea of this integrated view of business had begun to take hold of her

--- page 162 ---
imagination.
Gone was the resistance, the doubt, and the fear that what I had brought to
her door was beyond her, something unreachable for the baker of pies she
had come to believe she was.
What she was beginning to grasp is that she was a worthy opponent, more
worthy than she had ever realized, and that the game I was describing for her
was the same game she had been taught to play by her aunt, years ago in her
mother’s kitchen, with such loving attention. That there was absolutely no
difference!
She smiled at me, as though reading my thoughts.
“I’m beginning to see the connection between all these things we’ve
talked about,” she said. “They’re all beginning to make sense. The puzzle is
coming together. I can see the parts merge into an exciting picture that I now
know has been there all along! All that needed to be done for the picture to
take form was for someone to move the pieces into their proper place. I’d like
to describe it for you, the picture I’m beginning to see, before I ask you some
more questions.”
“Go right ahead,” I smiled. “In fact, I’d be disappointed if you didn’t.”
“It all goes back to my childhood, of course. To the spirit I spoke about
earlier. To what I felt like as a little girl. And I know now that I’m not alone;
that I’m not the only one who’s ever felt that way.
“That there were probably lots of other little girls and boys who were
suffering the same sort of experience. And lots of grown men and women
who, like me, are still carrying around the impact of their early childhood
experiences.
“And so I see my experiences—the corralling of the wild horse, the
stuffing away of the spirit my teachers and my parents trained me to do so
well—as the beginning of a philosophy for my business, a philosophy that
my business needs if I’m ever going to offer anything of true value to my
employees and my customers.
“‘There will be no stuffing of the spirit here,’ my business will say.
Maybe I should put it up above the door to remind everyone who comes in
what our purpose is.” She grinned. “Or, maybe better yet, ‘Let thy spirit run
free!’ Yes, that’s better. It even feels better.” She laughed aloud with the joy
of it.
As she continued, it became so clear to me what a miraculous gift
speaking can be.

--- page 163 ---
I saw that Sarah wasn’t so much talking to me but to herself, discovering
as she spoke the miracles that lived within her, within her experience, within
her relationship with her aunt, within her extraordinary imagination.
Discovering truths she never knew she knew. Discovering all the wealth that
was waiting there inside of her to be unearthed, to be explored, to be
treasured as the words came tumbling forth.
As though the words, once freed by the speaking of them, combined with
the air to become something else again. A vision. Understanding. Expansion.
Sarah continued.
“My picture of the business also goes back to what my aunt taught me
about caring.
“If my aunt were alive today, she would say, ‘If everyone cares, the pies
will take care of themselves!’
“And so I can see my business as a school, a school about caring that
teaches all the little things to my employees that my aunt tried so hard to
teach me: What it means to pay attention. What it means—to our spirits!—to
be present with the whole of ourselves in everything we do.
“My God, I thought I hadn’t learned anything!” she said to me, her eyes
wide with the astonishment of what she had just understood.
“But I had. I had. And now I’m going to take her place. That lovely
woman. That sweet, gentle, determined, old woman. I’m going to take her
place. I’m going to become the master in my own kitchen, just as she was the
master in hers.
“And the rules of the game—what a joy it’s going to be to create them.
Rules about dress. Rules about comportment. Rules about the tools we use
and how we use them. Rules about the floor and the walls and the
counterspace, how we clean them every night and every morning, how we
give them their final touch so that they absolutely glow! Rules about the pie
tins and about the cupboards in which we store things. Rules about glass,
rules about silver, rules about tin. Rules about the ovens, how they’re heated,
how they’re opened and closed, how they’re cleaned. Rules about opening
up, and closing up. Rules about money, about keeping the books, about
balancing at the end of each day. Rules about hair, about fingernails!”
Sarah’s eyes were flashing as she poured out the beginning of her vision,
as her vision began to take shape. She didn’t need to know what the specific
rules were yet; what was important was that she get a taste of the exercise.
As her aunt said, “The pies will take care of themselves.”

--- page 164 ---
Sarah was on her way.
“Talk to me more about management,” Sarah said. “I heard you say earlier
that I don’t need professional managers to be successful in my business; that,
in fact, I’m better off without them. What’s wrong with hiring experienced
managers?”
“Everything’s wrong with it, Sarah!
“Because, if you don’t know how to manage, how are you going to
choose them, and how are you going to manage them?
“You can’t!
“Because they will manage by the standards they have been taught to
manage by in somebody else’s business. Not by your standards.
“Remember Delegation rather than Abdication?
“You can’t delegate your accountabilities, Sarah.
“Delegating your accountabilities is abdication.
“You, as the Shareholder, as the owner, as the COO, as the
VP/Marketing, as the VP/Finance, whatever positions you take, must take full
accountability for what’s going on in your business.
“And to do so, you must lead the company in the direction you intend it to
go.
“And that means you must set the standard.
“And one of the most important set of standards you must establish is a
Management System through which all managers, and all those who would
become managers in your company, are expected to produce results.
“Standards surrounding your Primary Aim. Your company’s Strategic
Objective. The rules of the game. The story you’ve been telling me about
your aunt and about her extraordinary kitchen. And the standards that define
the vision you hold in your heart, and in your head, for the business called All
About Pies that you intend to realize!
“You don’t need professional managers to manage to those standards. All
you need are people who wish to learn how to manage to them. People who
are as personally committed to those standards as you are!
“In short, you need people who want to play your game, Sarah. Not
people who believe they have a better one.
“So, you need to invent the rules of the game, which become the
foundation of your Management System.
“And once having created these rules, once having created this game, you

--- page 165 ---
need to invent the way to manage it.
“Because your managers don’t simply manage people; your managers
manage the System by which your business, All About Pies, achieves its
objectives.
“The System produces the results; your people manage the system.
“And there is a Hierarchy of Systems in your business.
“This Hierarchy is composed of four distinct components:
“The first is, How We Do It Here.
“The second is, How We Recruit, Hire, and Train People to Do It Here.
“The Third is, How We Manage It Here.
“The Fourth is, How We Change It Here.
“And the ‘It’ I’m referring to is the stated purpose of your business. At
Federal Express it’s ‘When You Absolutely, Positively Have to Get It There
Overnight!’
“The ‘It’ of your business, Sarah, is Caring.
“How do you express Caring when you answer the telephone?
“How do you express Caring when you take a pie out of the oven?
“How do you express Caring when you take the money from a customer?
“And so forth and so on, in everything you do at All About Pies.
“And your answer to those questions is How You Do It Here! It is the
sum total of everything you’ve created, every distinct process for performing
every little task at All About Pies. Every bit of which is documented in your
Operations Manuals. Every bit of which is taught at your school. Every bit of
which is managed to, and improved upon, and discussed among you and your
people for as long as you’re in business! That’s what ‘It’ is. ‘It’ is your Best
Way. ‘It’ is what you believe in. ‘It’ is why people buy from you, work for
you, lend to you, trust you.
“And just as in the hotel we’ve visited, it is the system, not only the
people, that will differentiate your business from everyone else’s.
“Imagine trying to produce such a consistent result without such a
system!
“Imagine each manager in each of your future four stores doing his or her
own thing.
“How would anything be communicated consistently in such a business,
in which every form of language, every idea of organization, every kind of
process and system were expressed in an individual and subjective way by
each and every one of your people, without any standards, without any

--- page 166 ---
agreement, without any consistency in form—in fact, without any
consistency in judgment?
“Is that an appealing picture?” I asked.
“I’m exhausted just thinking about it,” Sarah responded.
“I know, and it is even worse than you can imagine.
“But a Management System is something else again. And when it is
combined with a well-conceived Marketing System…”