# Chapter 17: Your Marketing Strategy
book: TheEMythRevisited
pages: 167-178
section_id: chapter-17

--- page 167 ---
17
YOUR MARKETING STRATEGY
What we have here is a failure to communicate.
Anonymous
Your Marketing Strategy starts, ends, lives, and dies with your customer.
So in the development of your Marketing Strategy, it is absolutely
imperative that you forget about your dreams, forget about your visions,
forget about your interests, forget about what you want—forget about
everything but your customer!
When it comes to marketing, what you want is unimportant.
It’s what your customer wants that matters.
And what your customer wants is probably significantly different from
what you think he wants.
The Irrational Decision Maker
Try to visualize your customer.
He’s standing before you.
He’s not frowning; nor is he smiling. He is perfectly neutral. Yet, there’s
something strange about him.
Coming out of his forehead, reaching up toward the ceiling, is an antenna!
And at the end of the antenna is a sensor, beeping away like crazy.

--- page 168 ---
And the sensor is taking in all of the sensory data around it—the colors,
shapes, sounds, and smells of your store, or your office, or the restaurant
where you’re meeting for lunch.
The sensor is also taking in sensory data from you: how you are standing
or sitting, the color of your hair, how your hair is combed, the expression on
your face—Is it tense? Are you looking directly at him or off to the side?—
the crease in your slacks, the color of your shoes—Are they shined? Are they
worn? Are the laces tied?
Nothing escapes the sensor as it absorbs the stimuli from the
environment.
Nothing escapes your customer as he absorbs the information he uses to
make his decision to buy or not to buy.
But this step in the buying process is only the first.
It’s what the sensor does with the information that’s of interest here.
Because it’s how the sensor processes the information that will determine
the decision your customer is about to make.
Think of the sensor as your customer’s Conscious Mind.
Its job is to gather the information needed for a decision.
Most of what it does, however, is unconscious; that is, automatic,
habitual.
So even though your customer’s Conscious Mind is actively absorbing all
manner and forms of impressions, it is totally unaware of most of them.
It can do it—literally—in its sleep.
In fact, it can’t stop doing it!
Fortunately, the Conscious Mind doesn’t need to be aware.
For it’s not your customer’s Conscious Mind that has to make the
decisions.
It’s your customer’s Unconscious Mind.
It’s in your customer’s Unconscious Mind where all the action is.
It’s in your customer’s Unconscious Mind where the second step of the
buying process takes place.
What is your customer’s Unconscious Mind?
It’s like a vast, dark, underground sea in which a multitude of exotic
creatures swim about, single and in schools, silently seeking out food, each
with entirely different needs and tastes.
Those creatures are your customer’s expectations.
And the sea in which they swim is a truly foreign place to your customer.

--- page 169 ---
He has no idea what’s swimming around down there. What’s lurking
behind some subterranean rock. What’s lying still and quiet as a stone on the
bottom, waiting patiently and deliberately for some sweet morsel to wander
by.
But you can rest assured that every creature in that sea—every one of
those expectations—is a product of your customer’s life!
Of his reactions, perceptions, attitudes, associations, beliefs, opinions,
inferences, conclusions. An accumulation of all his experiences since the
instant of his birth (and for all we know, before it) to this very moment when
he stands before you.
And all his expectations are nothing more or less than the means through
which the sum of them all—your customer’s personality—gets fed what it
needs.
The food it needs comes in the form of sensory input from the Conscious
Mind (the “surface”).
And if the food is compatible with its expectations, the Unconscious
Mind says, “Yes.”
And if the food is incompatible with its expectations, the Unconscious
Mind says, “No.”
And that decision, yes or no, is made at the instant it gets a taste!
In a television commercial, we’re told, the sale is made or lost in the first
three or four seconds.
In a print ad, tests have shown, 75 percent of the buying decisions are
made at the headline alone.
In a sales presentation, data have shown us, the sale is made or lost in the
first three minutes.
And all that happens after that psychographic moment of truth, after the
buying decision is made, is that the Unconscious Mind sends its answer up to
the Conscious Mind, which then goes back out into the world to assemble the
rational armament it needs to support its already determined emotional
commitment.
And that’s how buying decisions are made.
Irrationally!
If anyone cared to do it, it could probably be proved that no one yet has
ever made a rational decision to buy anything!
So when your customer says, “I want to think about it,” don’t you believe
him.

--- page 170 ---
He’s not going to think about it.
He doesn’t know how.
He’s already done all the “thinking” he’s going to do—he either wants it
or not.
What your customer is really saying is one of two things: he is either
emotionally incapable of saying no for fear of how you might react if he told
you the truth, or you haven’t provided him with the “food” his Unconscious
Mind craves.
Either way, little or no thought enters into the transaction.
Despite what we would like to believe, the decision was made
unconsciously and instantaneously.
In fact, it was made long before you ever met.
But your customer didn’t know it.
The Two Pillars of a Successful Marketing Strategy
The question then becomes: If my customer doesn’t know what he wants,
how can I?
The answer is, you can’t!
Not unless you know more about him than he does about himself.
Not unless you know his demographics and his psychographics.
Demographics and psychographics are the two essential pillars supporting
a successful marketing program.
If you know who your customer is—demographics—you can then
determine why he buys—psychographics.
And having done so, you can then begin to construct a Prototype to
satisfy his unconscious needs, but scientifically rather than arbitrarily.
Again, demographics is the science of marketplace reality. It tells you
who buys.
Psychographics is the science of perceived marketplace reality. It tells
you why certain demographic types buy for one reason while other
demographic types buy for another.
Let me give you an example of how these sciences might be utilized in
your Marketing Strategy.
Notice the shade of blue on the jacket of this book. I call it “IBM Blue.”
Why? Because it’s IBM’s color. That’s why, I imagine, IBM is called “Big

--- page 171 ---
Blue” in the marketplace.
Why that specific shade of blue rather than another? Why blue at all?
Because that shade of blue has an extraordinarily high appeal and
preference to IBM’s Central Demographic Model.
They see that shade of blue, and it’s love at first sight!
Ever heard the expression, “True Blue”? That’s what that particular color
is: the color IBM’s Central Demographic Model consumer knows it can
depend on.
What do you think would have happened had IBM chosen orange instead
of blue?
Well, since orange is at the opposite end of the preferential spectrum for
IBM’s consumer, the IBM success story may not have been so momentous.
It’s hard to imagine “Big Orange” instead of “Big Blue.” I think IBM’s
customer would have had trouble buying an orange computer!
Now, I know that sounds ridiculous, but you can test it if you like.
Remember the little test I suggested earlier in this book, the one with the
navy blue suit?
I’d like you to visualize someone wearing such a suit.
Can you see him in your mind’s eye?
Deep navy blue, vents in the back, possibly a pin stripe. Sharply creased
trousers. White starched shirt. A red and blue striped tie. Black, highly
polished wing-tip shoes.
Now how do you feel about him?
Does he look businesslike?
Does he look like someone you can trust?
Does he appear to represent something solid, reliable, dependable?
Of course he does.
Research shows that the navy suit is perhaps the most powerful suit a
person can wear in business. Instant impact.
Now visualize the very same person you did before, but this time he’s not
wearing a navy blue suit.
Now he’s wearing an orange suit.
That’s right, a two-piece orange suit!
An expensive one at that.
And with it, he’s wearing a white-on-white silk shirt and a green and
white striped Italian silk tie.
And a silver belt buckle with his initials in green jade across its face.

--- page 172 ---
And a diamond tie pin, two carats, glimmering out at you just above the
top button of his vest.
And proudly peeking out of his finely creased orange pants, an
incomparable pair of white lizard cowboy boots!
Can you see it?
Do you get the picture?
Well, you better take it fast because he’s out of business!
And what’s important to know is that the difference between the two men
isn’t in them—it’s in your mind.
Your Unconscious Mind.
What’s more, the difference is perceived instantly without a moment of
thought.
The fact that you couldn’t conduct serious business with the man in the
orange suit but you could if he were wearing blue says that there is no such
thing as reality. At least as we understand it.
Reality only exists in someone’s perceptions, attitudes, beliefs,
conclusions—whatever you wish to call those positions of the mind from
which all expectations arise—and nowhere else.
So the famous dictum that says, “Find a need and fill it,” is inaccurate.
It should say, “Find a perceived need and fill it.”
Because if your customer doesn’t perceive he needs something, he
doesn’t, even if he actually does.
Get it?
Those perceptions are at the heart of your customer’s decision-making
process.
And if you know his demographics, you can understand what those
perceptions are, and then figure out what you must do to satisfy them and the
expectations they produce.
You can know your customer’s psychographic reality.
Each demographic model has a specific set of perceptions that are
identifiable in advance.
Women of a certain age, with a certain amount of education, with a
certain size family, living in a certain geography, buy for very specific
psychographic reasons.
Those unconsciously held reasons will be different from another group of
women, of a different age and marital status, with a different educational
background, living in a different part of the country.

--- page 173 ---
And these differences predetermine what each group buys.
Are you beginning to get a sense of the complexity of this business called
marketing? I hope so.
Because until you do, until you begin to take it seriously, until you give it
the earnest attention it demands, your Prototype will continue to be the only
thing it could hope to be under the circumstances—a crap shoot!
At GERBER Business Development Corporation, we have created tools
for our small business clients to begin the often arduous task of making
demographic and psychographic determinations, and how to position their
Prototype in the mind of their consumer. The impact has been astonishing.
Small businesses that acted like small businesses when we met them
began to operate with intelligence.
Their customers came vividly alive to them, often for the very first time.
Inquiry, the active solicitation of specific information, and controlled
experimentation replaced the guessing, blind hope, and feverish busy work
that preceded them.
Innovation, Quantification, and Orchestration became the driving forces
behind their efforts.
The fact is, any small business can do it. And every small business must!
If Mature businesses, such as IBM, McDonald’s, Federal Express, and
Disney, take such things seriously, then how can you not do the same?
Your business is far more fragile than a big business.
So if anything, you must take marketing more seriously than a big
business does.
And time is running out.
We have entered the “unforgiving age.”
An age in which countless small businesses will either accept the
challenge of an information-glutted society or be destroyed by it.
An age in which your customer is deluged by so many products and
promises that he becomes swamped in confusion and indecision.
The challenge of our age is to learn our customer’s language. And then to
speak that language clearly and well so that your voice can be heard above
the din.
Because if your customer doesn’t hear you, he’ll pass you by.
No doubt you feel frustrated as you read this. You must be asking
yourself: How do I do it? How do I determine my customer’s demographics,
his psychographics? What colors to use? What shapes? What words?

--- page 174 ---
But if you’re asking those questions, you’re well on your way!
For the purpose of this book is not to answer those questions but to raise
them!
Not “how to do it” but “what needs to be done.”
Unless you understand what needs to be done, unless you understand the
essential importance of marketing to your Prototype, unless you understand
that your customer is far less rational in his convictions and expectations than
you had ever imagined, unless you understand that your Prototype is your
product—all the “how to do it” in the world won’t make a bit of difference to
you.
But we’re not finished yet.
We have one more step to take in your Business Development Program.
Your Systems Strategy, the glue that holds your Prototype together.
“I know you don’t want to talk about ‘how to do it,’” Sarah said, squinting
her eyes for mock emphasis, “but if you want to leave this table alive, you’re
going to have to give me more than that!”
“How do I determine the demographics and psychographics of my most
important customer?” she implored me.
“Well,” I began, “let’s start where you are. What we already know about
your business is that it’s attracting someone to it. That the picture you have in
your mind about the All About Pies you wish to create isn’t that foreign from
the one you’ve created. That while you didn’t clearly formulate the ideas at
the beginning of your business, we now know that your inner Entrepreneur
was busy all the same. That the Caring you wish to express in the All About
Pies of the future was in you all the time. It’s expressed today in the delicious
quality of your pies, the beauty of your shop, and, I might add, the lovely,
albeit frazzled, state of your being.”
She snorted quietly in response, and I went on.
“So, I believe it’s safe for us to assume that the people coming in your
door today are unconsciously expressing their preference for the Caring you
have so eloquently shared with me. They’re buying it even now!
“The first question you must ask, then, is: Who are they?
“Who are my customers, specifically? What is their Demographic
Profile?
“How do you answer that question? You ask them!
“You ask each and every one of them, by having them complete a

--- page 175 ---
questionnaire in return for a free pie!
“The free pie is the price you pay for that information.
“The answers you get will prove to be a bonanza!
“But, while you’re at it, you might as well get the psychographic data you
need, as well as the geographic data you need.
“How do you do that? You find out on your questionnaire what colors
they prefer, what shapes, what words. You find out the brands of perfume
they buy, automobiles, clothes, jewelry, food. You match those brands to the
ads and commercials that sell them, and you discover by becoming interested
in what messages are being sent to your customers by other companies—who
are successfully selling to them—what messages you might send to those
customers, who are demographically and psychographically the same as your
existing Central Demographic Model, to intentionally come in your door.
“How do you find them, those people you have not yet met? You buy a
list of those who fit your Central Demographic Model in what you’ve now
determined to be your Trading Zone!
“What’s your Trading Zone? It’s the geographic perimeter within which
your current customers mainly live. You take their addresses from your
questionnaire, identify them on a map, draw a line around them, and that’s
your first-pass Trading Zone.
“You then buy a list of demographically correct people living in that area.
“Is that enough ‘how to do it’ for now?” I asked Sarah with mock
impatience. “Will that keep you busy for a while?
“Because if it is, I’d like to go back to the ‘what to do’ for a minute.
There’s a lot more to it than meets the eye.”
“This marketing thing isn’t nearly as complicated as I might have made it
seem,” I continued. “But it’s important that you take it seriously. Because it
most often is regarded by small business owners as merely ‘good common
sense.’ And I have seen more often than not that the only definition of ‘good
common sense’ is ‘my opinion.’ That most small business owners, suffering
as they do from what I’ve come to call ‘willful disinformation,’ simply
decide what they want to do without any information at all, without any
interest in what’s true, and then simply do it. Stationery designed by the local
quick-printer with a logo thrown in. Colors picked by their wives. Signs
designed by the local sign guy whose experience is in painting signs, not in
determining what colors and shapes are psychographically correct.

--- page 176 ---
“In short, Sarah, while you don’t have to go over the scientific deep end,
you do have to be sensitive to the science of the marketing art. You have to
be interested in it. In fact, you have to be interested in everything your
business needs. You have to become a student of the art of business and the
science of business. And that’s the ‘what to do’ part of all this. Do you realize
how much marketing money is spent by companies like McDonald’s, Federal
Express, Disney, and Walmart to get it just right? Do you realize how much
time and attention companies like Pepsico and American Express spend to
get their brands just right? And how easy it is to miss the mark? And what it
costs them if they do?
“In a small business you simply can’t afford to spend the money they do.
But you can afford to spend the time, the thought, the attention, on the same
questions they ask.
“And that’s why I keep on going back to the true work of the small
business owner—the strategic work rather than the tactical work. Because if
you’re doing tactical work all the time, if you’re working all the time
devoting all your energy in your business, you won’t have any time or energy
left to ask, let alone answer, all of the absolutely critical questions you need
to ask. You’ll simply have no time or energy left to work on it.
“The owner of the business must start out by asking marketing questions.
“The COO must continue to ask marketing questions.
“The VP/Marketing is absolutely accountable for asking marketing
questions.
“In fact, there isn’t a function or position within the company that is free
of asking marketing questions, if by marketing we mean, ‘What must our
business be in the mind of our customers in order for them to choose us over
everyone else?’
“And so, seen from the appropriate perspective, the entire business
process by which your company does what it does is a marketing process.
“It starts with the promise you make to attract them to your door.
“It continues with the sale you make once they get there.
“And it ends with the delivery of the promise before they leave your door.
“In some companies that process is called Lead Generation, Lead
Conversion, Client Fulfillment.
“In your business, Sarah, it’s called Marketing, Sales, and Operations.
“But whatever you call it, it is the essential key process that runs through
every business.

--- page 177 ---
“And it is how well-integrated that process is, how totally and completely
connected each part of the process appears in relation to the rest of the
process, that will determine how successful you are at getting them to come
back for more.
“And it is getting them to come back for more that is the Primary Aim of
every business.
“Because what McDonald’s knows, and what Federal Express knows, and
what Disney knows—indeed, what every extraordinary business knows—is
that the customer you’ve got is one hell of a lot less expensive to sell to than
the customer you don’t have yet.
“And that’s why the business process of Lead Generation, Lead
Conversion, and Client Fulfillment is so critical to the growth of your
business. And that’s what marketing is. The whole process. Not just a part of
it but the entire thing.
“And it never stops!
“And so, while the VP/Marketing and the VP/Operations and the
VP/Finance each have their own specific accountabilities, they share one
common purpose—to make a promise their customer wants to hear, and to
deliver on that promise better than anyone else on the block!
“And the place where they join each other is at the position of COO. The
COO is the driver of all this. The COO connects each part of the business
process. The COO maintains the integrity of the whole by acting as the
arbiter of the Strategic Objective he is accountable for fulfilling, of the rules
of the game he is accountable for maintaining, of the game the business has
chosen to play.
“And it is there, at that point in the middle, where Hierarchy and Process
meet.
“It is there, at that point in the middle, that your business comes together.
“It is there, at that point where your Management System and your
Business Development Process play out their respective roles so vividly.
“It is at that point, the point I have called the Power Point in an earlier
book, that a business truly becomes alive.
“Where the static and dynamic nature of every great business meets. ‘This
is how we do it here,’ and then, ‘This is how we do it here,’ and then, ‘This is
how we do it here,’ over and over, and still over again.
“Continuous improvement.
“Electrifying, ecstatic, alive.

--- page 178 ---
“To do what?
“To deliver the promise no one else in your industry dares to make!
“That’s what marketing is, Sarah. That’s what your business must be.
Alive, growing, committed to keeping a promise no competitor would dare to
make.
“That’s what needs to be done. Are you ready to do it?”
“Just watch me,” Sarah said.
“Then let’s go on to the last part and tie it all together,” I said.
“Let’s take a look at Systems, and the absolutely essential role they play.”