# Chapter 13: Your Strategic Objective
book: TheEMythRevisited
pages: 117-128
section_id: chapter-13

--- page 117 ---
13
YOUR STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE
‘Your arrows do not carry,’ observed the Master, ‘because they do
not reach far enough spiritually.’
Eugen Herrigel
Zen and the Art of Archery
Once you have a picture of how you want your life to be, and you come to
the realization that it’s more than just things to have and things to do, once
you realize that what you and I really want is to have the room, the openness,
to expand, to grow, to be more of ourselves, whatever that means, and to find
out what that means is what’s most important to us, once you see that, you
can then turn to the business that’s going to help you get there; you can then
turn to the development of your Strategic Objective.
Your Strategic Objective is a very clear statement of what your business
has to ultimately do for you to achieve your Primary Aim.
It is the vision of the finished product that is and will be your business.
In this context, your business is a means rather than an end, a vehicle to
enrich your life rather than one that drains the life you have.
Your Strategic Objective is not a business plan. It is a product of your
Life Plan, as well as your Business Strategy and Plan. Your Life Plan shapes
your life, and the business that is to serve it. Your Business Strategy and Plan
provide the structure within which your business is intended to operate over
time to fulfill your Life Plan. Your Business Strategy and Plan are a way of

--- page 118 ---
communicating to anyone you must communicate to the direction your
business is going, how it intends to get there, and the specific benchmarks it
will need to hit in order for the Strategy and Plan to work.
Your Business Strategy and Plan are also useful for marketing your
business to those who are important to you: your banker, your investors, and
your strategic alliances in the business community.
But unless your Business Strategy and Plan can be reduced to a set of
simple and clearly stated standards, it will do more to confuse you than to
help.
Your Strategic Objective is just such a list of standards.
It is a tool for measuring your progress toward a specific end.
It is designed for implementation, not for rationalization.
It is a template for your business, to make certain that the time you invest
in it produces exactly what you want from it.
Let’s take a closer look at some of the standards that need to be included
in your Strategic Objective.
The First Standard: Money
The first standard of your Strategic Objective is money. Gross revenues.
How big is your vision? How big will your company be when it’s finally
done? Will it be a $300,000 company? A million-dollar company? A $500-
million company?
If you don’t know the answer, how can you possibly know whether your
business can help you realize your Primary Aim?
But gross revenues alone are not enough. You also have to know what
your gross profits are going to be, your pretax profits, your after-tax profits.
At this point you come face-to-face with the first dilemma encountered by
everyone going into business. How can you possibly know now what your
business is going to produce in sales that far in the future?
The answer is, you can’t! But it doesn’t matter. At the beginning of your
business, any standards are better than no standards. Creating money
standards is not just strategically necessary for your business; it is
strategically necessary for your life, for the realization of your Primary Aim.
Indeed, the first question you must always ask when creating standards
for your Strategic Objective is: What will serve my Primary Aim?
The first question about money then becomes: How much money do I

--- page 119 ---
need to live the way I wish? Not in income but in assets. In other words, how
much money do you need in order to be independent of work, to be free?
In fact, there is ultimately only one reason to create a business of your
own, and that is to sell it!
To do it, to finish it, and then to get paid for it!
Just like Ray Kroc did, to create your Franchise Prototype, to turn-key
your business, to create a business that really works, and then sell it.
How much do you want for it? Ten times earnings? Twenty times
earnings?
When do you want it? Three years from now? Five years?
Why would anyone buy it?
Because it works!
And it works because you built it that way. You built it so that it would
work better than anyone else’s business. You invented a turn-key solution to
your specific kind of business’s problems. A little money machine. An
absolutely predictable little business that does what it promises to do every
single time.
A business that can give you everything you want.
And because it can give you everything you want, it can give your
prospective buyer everything he wants.
At this point another set of standards are immediately brought into the
picture. Because once you’ve created a set of financial standards for your life,
once you know what it is your business needs to provide you with as a return
on your investment, it becomes obvious that the business must have a
realistic chance of achieving those standards, of producing that return on your
investment.
How can you know whether or not it does?
By determining whether your business is an Opportunity Worth Pursuing.
The Second Standard: An Opportunity Worth Pursuing
An Opportunity Worth Pursuing is a business that can fulfill the financial
standards you’ve created for your Primary Aim and your Strategic Objective.
If it is reasonable to assume that it can, the business is worth pursuing.
If it is unreasonable to assume that it can, then no matter how exciting,
interesting, or appealing the business is, forget it. Walk away from it. It will
consume too much of your precious time and prevent you from finding a true

--- page 120 ---
Opportunity Worth Pursuing.
How do you know whether you have an Opportunity Worth Pursuing?
Look around. Ask yourself: Does the business I have in mind alleviate a
frustration experienced by a large enough group of consumers to make it
worth my while?
This standard fulfills two primary requirements of your Strategic
Objective. It tells you what kind of business you’re creating while it defines
who your customer will be. It tells you what you need to sell and to whom.
What Kind of Business Am I In?
Ask anyone what kind of business they’re in and they’ll instinctively
respond with the name of the commodity they sell. “We’re in the computer
business.” Or, “We’re in the hot tub business.” Always the commodity, never
the product.
What’s the difference?
The commodity is the thing your customer actually walks out with in his
hand.
The product is what your customer feels as he walks out of your business.
What he feels about your business, not what he feels about the
commodity.
Understanding the difference between the two is what creating a great
business is all about.
Charles Revson, the founder of Revlon and an extraordinarily successful
entrepreneur, once said about his company: “In the factory Revlon
manufactures cosmetics, but in the store Revlon sells hope.”
The commodity is cosmetics; the product, hope.
In a Chanel television commercial in the 1980s, an incredibly handsome
man and a strikingly beautiful woman are alone while music plays
hypnotically in the background.
The scene shifts quickly and frequently to other shots, such as a tall, erect
building.
So far there hasn’t been a sound except for the music that supports this
suggestive visual ballet.
The black shadow of an airplane moves vertically up the building.
She approaches him.
The music continues.
He says, “Can I ask you a question?” in a voice filled with intimacy and

--- page 121 ---
invitation.
We don’t hear her answer.
We just see her tilt her head back, close her eyes, and open her mouth
slightly.
Suddenly, the message: “Share the Fantasy. Chanel.”
Not a word about perfume. That’s the commodity. The commercial is
selling the product—fantasy.
The commercial is saying, “Buy Chanel and this fantasy can be yours.”
What’s your product? What feeling will your customer walk away with?
Peace of mind? Order? Power? Love? What is he really buying when he buys
from you?
The truth is, nobody’s interested in the commodity.
People buy feelings.
And as the world becomes more and more complex, and the commodities
more varied, the feelings we want become more urgent, less rational, more
unconscious.
How your business anticipates those feelings and satisfies them is your
product.
And the demographics and psychographics associated with your customer
will predetermine how you do that.
Who Is My Customer?
Every business has a Central Demographic Model. That is, a most
probable customer. And that customer has a whole set of characteristics
through which you can define him—age, sex, income, family status,
education, profession, and so forth.
Demographics is the science of marketplace reality. It tells you who your
customer is.
Your Central Demographic Model customer buys for very particular
reasons, none of which are rational or even explicable! Yet he buys, or
doesn’t.
The motivations that propel him in either direction constitute your Central
Psychographic Model.
Psychographics is the science of perceived marketplace reality. It tells
you why your customer buys.
So when you ask, “Is this business an Opportunity Worth Pursuing?” the
only way to tell is to determine how many selling opportunities you have

--- page 122 ---
(your customers’ demographics) and how successfully you can satisfy the
emotional or perceived needs lurking there (your customers’
psychographics).
Standards Three Through?
There is no specific number of standards in your Strategic Objective.
There are only specific questions that need to be answered.
• When is your Prototype going to be completed? In two years? Three?
Ten?
• Where are you going to be in business? Locally? Regionally?
Nationally? Internationally?
• How are you going to be in business? Retail? Wholesale? A
combination of the two?
• What standards are you going to insist upon regarding reporting,
cleanliness, clothing, management, hiring, firing, training, and so
forth?
You can begin to see that the standards you create for your business will
shape both your business and the experience you have of your business.
In fact, the standards of your Strategic Objective create the tension that
draws the future model of your business and the way it actually appears today
closer to one another.
As we saw earlier, standards create the energy by which the best
companies, and the most effective people, produce results.
It was eleven o’clock Monday morning, one week following my last meeting
with Sarah. It was the one day of the week All About Pies was closed.
We decided to spend the day together to talk about her business.
As she walked up to the table in the restaurant where we had decided to
meet, I could see her excitement. She was a much different Sarah than when I
had seen her a week earlier. Her eyes were clear, her body exuberant. She
looked much younger. She also looked like she had a lot to talk about.
The restaurant was owned by a friend of mine. We had done a lot of work
together in his start-up years and so it was a place where I could take a table
and spend as much time as I needed without being rushed out the door. In

--- page 123 ---
fact, it was a wonderful place to provide a new client with some clarity about
what a business could do when done well.
Sarah sat down and immediately began to talk.
I poured her some coffee.
“It seems for the first time in my life, I truly have come to some
understanding about what I want. It is important for me to tell you how much
I appreciate what you’ve given me. But, having said that, I realized, from
almost the moment you left last week, that I would never allow myself again
to be consumed by the work of my business. It became obvious to me, with a
clarity that’s almost impossible to describe, how big a price I have been
paying for being so obsessed with my work. And, once I realized it, I swear,
it was like I was suddenly and forever free of it. Something truly freeing
happened to me that night.
“And it’s not as though I haven’t been working for the past six days. I
have. Business has to go on, after all. But this past week was not the way it
was before. While one part of me was doing the work—I guess that’s the part
you would call The Technician—part of me stayed removed from it. Part of
me wasn’t taken at all by the work I was doing. And, remember how I told
you that I didn’t think I was entrepreneurial? Well, I suddenly realized that I
am! That I’ve always had an entrepreneurial part in me. That what you call
The Entrepreneur, I have always thought of as my spirit.
“‘My spirit’ is what my aunt called it. She used to say to me, ‘Sarah, feed
your spirit. It is your spirit which gives you life.’ I remember as a little girl, it
was my spirit that always got me into trouble. It was my spirit that my
teachers complained about so much. They used to say to my parents, ‘If it
weren’t for Sarah’s spirit, she would be doing much better in school than she
does.’ It was my spirit that would dream when I was in the classroom, rather
than pay attention to what was going on around me.
“I used to fantasize about things all the time—my head went to the
strangest places. Anything could set me off. And while that part of me would
really seem to tick my teachers and my parents off, my aunt always seemed
to nurture it. ‘You need to be very gentle with your spirit, Sarah,’ she used to
say to me. ‘It needs to be free, but it also needs you to direct its attention. Too
much of one, and not enough of the other, and your spirit will take off like a
wild horse. That’s how you need to think of your spirit, Sarah, like a wild
horse. Part of it is there to serve you, and another part to serve itself. The
thing you need to learn is which part is which. If you put it behind a fence,

--- page 124 ---
you will kill it. But if you leave it to come and go as it pleases, you will never
understand it.’
“And I see that’s what I’ve been doing these past three years,” Sarah said
to me. “I’ve put a fence around my spirit, around my entrepreneurial nature,
without even realizing it. But what I really came to understand this past week
is that I’ve been doing that, putting a fence around my spirit, for a long, long
time. My parents taught me how to do it; my teachers taught me how to do it.
And, like a good little girl, I learned the lesson well. But now the wild horse
is free! Now I’m back in the kitchen with my aunt again. Now I really
understand what my aunt was doing with me in the kitchen all those years
ago. She wasn’t teaching me how to bake pies; she was baking me! She was
teaching me about the wild horse, about my spirit. About creativity.
“And when you talked about The Entrepreneur, it all came back to me
with a rush. My aunt, the kitchen, the pies, the dreaming in the classroom, the
secret places I used to go hide when I was a little girl. And how I stopped
hiding in those places a long time ago, and how much I miss it!
“What I’ve come to realize is that I’ve confused baking good pies with
what my aunt was really talking to me about. I thought that baking good pies
was it, when it wasn’t. It never has been. And it never will be again.
“So, back to my business,” she continued. “It’s clear to me now that what
I wish to do is to develop it, grow it, and be free of it to do whatever else it is
I wish to do, even though, right now, at this very moment, I couldn’t for the
life of me tell you what that is.”
“Try,” I said. “Try to tell me as best you can.”
She smiled. “You’re just like my aunt; she never let me off the hook
either.
“Okay, I’ll try. Why not—what else do we have to do?”
She closed her eyes for a moment and seemed to gather herself. And then
she began to speak softly, as though to herself.
“I’m a little girl again. When I still had my hiding places. Before I lost my
spirit. It’s summer, and I’m lying in bed looking up at the ceiling in my room,
feeling the cool summer breeze floating through the open window. There’s
nothing I have to do; there’s no place I have to be. It’s the most wonderful
feeling of my life, lying here like this, opening my eyes, closing them,
dreaming, smelling the wonderful summer smells, the smell of cut grass, the
smell of the water sprinkling on the lawn, the fullness of it.
“And then I begin to dream, first in colors, nothing specific, just colors,

--- page 125 ---
floating above my head, like crystals and flowers and blossoms of light in
glowing colors. And then the colors take form—they are me, and they are
also something else. I’m walking by the stream that runs across our land,
about 500 feet from the house, down where the four oaks stand. We have
these four oaks—huge, gnarled trees that stand like a miniature forest at the
corner of our property. My aunt and I called them ‘Four Oaks,’ as though
they were another country. And I used to go there as a little girl and imagine I
was in another country.
“I’m in ‘Four Oaks’ now, in my mind, as I lie there in my bed, as I used
to do time after time. And it’s there where my wild horse waited for me. He is
standing in the center of the ‘Four Oaks,’ his body glistening in the shade,
black as black can be. I walk up to him and touch his face, and he shudders
and pulls away from me. For a moment we watch each other without moving,
and then, he’s gone! He whirls around and speeds off, his mane and tail
streaming, out of the trees, through the stream, over the hill on the other side
of the stream, and out of sight. I’m suddenly aware of the sweet summer
breeze again, as it softly touches my face, and I’m in bed, hugging myself
under the covers, thrilled to be alive on such a wonderful summer morning
when there’s nothing at all I have to do but this.”
Tears were streaming down Sarah’s cheeks. Tears of something precious
lost and then found. There was a radiant smile on her face. The tears also
welled up in my eyes, watching her, understanding what this meant to her,
and understanding at the same time what this meant to me.
We ate lunch almost without talking and then settled down into an afternoon
of conversation. The waiter brought us a pot of tea. Sarah poured herself and
me a cup, and then I began.
“Tell me,” I said, “now that you have a better feeling for what your
business can do for you, why don’t you try to describe it to me. Why don’t
you begin to describe your Strategic Objective?”
“Okay,” she began. “I’ve given some thought to this,” she smiled, almost
bashfully.
I was thinking to myself, as she finished collecting her thoughts, that I’ve
seen that smile dozens, if not hundreds, of times before when owners of a
business begin to imagine their company as something bigger than they ever
dared to imagine before, and as they tell it to me or to someone else. It’s as
though they are embarrassed to be seen imagining something bigger than they

--- page 126 ---
are; as though they are overreaching, being presumptuous. I suspect they
must have experienced something similar when they were children, telling
their parents or their teachers about a fanciful idea they had, and feeling the
disappointment and shame that comes from being told that you’re being
unrealistic, that you’re dreaming, hearing them say, “You can’t do that.” And
finding themselves alone as children with their dreams that they dared not
share again. How, without even realizing it, our parents and our teachers take
our “spirit” away.
But, like I knew she would, Sarah continued without embarrassment now,
fully taken by the pictures she was describing. This was her business, this
was her idea, and she could see it as clearly as anything.
“I see my business about seven years from now,” she said. “There are
four locations: the one I have now and three more.” She named the three
communities adjoining hers.
“The name of the business is the same. There’s no need to change that.
The business is all about pies, all about the experience of pies my aunt gave
to me. It’s that experience I wish to give to other people. Not only my
customers but the people I hire. I want everyone to know, somehow, that All
About Pies is a metaphor for something much finer.
“I see the shops producing annual sales of $450,000 each, for a total of
$1,800,000 a year. I’m not totally certain what the net profit will be, but I’ve
decided that it should be about 15 percent, or $67,500 for each shop, for a
total of $270,000 for the four. I feel that that’s a reasonable profit to shoot
for, even though today I’m only producing about 11 percent, after my
income, I mean.
“That means if I sell the business in seven years, given a realistic
price/earnings ratio, I think it’s called, I should be able to sell the business for
more than $1 million. One million dollars in seven years—that’s my dream,”
she said to me, smiling, as though she could already see the money in the
bank. “Because, first, I won’t ever need any more money than that to do
everything I have ever wanted, and second, because it’s really a great round
number to shoot for. It sort of makes everything I need to do really concrete.
“Before I can open my second shop, I realize I’ve got to get this one
operating without me. And so, one of the first things I’m going to do—and
I’ve already begun to do this since we met last week—is to document all of
the things I really know how to do today. For example, I know how to bake a
great pie. And I know that I can document how I do that, so that’s one of the

--- page 127 ---
first places I’m going to begin. But I’m getting ahead of myself. Let me tell
you what my business will look like when it’s done, so you can really get a
feel for it.
“My aunt used to say that one of the problems we have in our lives is that
we don’t express our caring deeply or often enough. She used to say that
when we were in the kitchen cutting the apples, or something like that. She’d
say, ‘When we cut apples, we’re doing something important. And God is
giving us something important, not only the apple, which is important
enough, but the kitchen, and the knife, and the company we’re giving each
other. So when we cut the apples, we need to remember that, and hold them
just right, and slice into them with just the appropriate force, not too much,
not too little.’ She would say, ‘Hold my hand while I cut the apple. Do you
feel what I mean? Not too much, and not too little. Too much and you are
taken away by the task. Too little and the apple doesn’t get cut.’
“Anyway, in my business I want to express ‘not too much and not too
little.’ I want the business to be an expression of ‘our caring deeply and often
enough.’ I want the business, All About Pies, to be all about caring, not about
pies.
“And if the business is all about caring, then everything we do in the
business, everything the business ‘looks, acts, and feels like,’” she said to me
with a smile, remembering the story I had shared with her about Tom
Watson, “then everything the business is will be a reflection of that, a
reflection of caring. Caring will be the true product of my business, not pies.
“So I see All About Pies as a model for everyone who comes into contact
with it. And what’s so exciting about that is I know I can do it! My aunt
taught me how. I know what it means to care enough about the kitchen to
scrub it down until it gleams. I know what it means to care enough about the
knives to sharpen them until they’re razor-keen. I know what it means to
select the finest fruit, to spend time smelling it, holding it, looking at it, to
know exactly when it’s ready. To make absolutely certain of that, my aunt
planted her own garden, her own trees. And we would see that only the best
of organic fertilizers were used, and so I know that All About Pies needs to
grow its own fruit in its own gardens. And that’s something I just realized
this week!
“So I now feel certain that, in order for All About Pies to become what I
can imagine it to become, it won’t be enough for my employees to just work
in the shop—they need to learn everything just as I did when I was a girl

--- page 128 ---
working with my aunt. All About Pies will be to them what my aunt was to
me!
“And I know I can do that!” she said to me, again passionately. “It’s as
real to me now as my aunt was to me then.
“So each shop will produce pies with fruit from a central organic garden.
Which means I’m going to have to find one to buy, or land that I’m going to
have to plant, centrally located between the shops so that each has the access
it needs.
“What it also means is that the shops are only going to bake pies from
fruit that’s in season here, when it’s in season. That’s all my aunt ever did.
I’m not going to use fruit from anyplace other than my own gardens, and that
is going to be something unique about All About Pies that differentiates it
from every other bakery or small pie shop. Truly homegrown. With
homegrown gentle care.
“But what’s also exciting to me,” Sarah continued, “is that I realize that
I’ve already done a lot of what I’m describing in my current shop!
“The floors are the best oak. The ovens are the best you can buy. The
display cases are absolutely gorgeous.
“My aunt would have loved my place.
“And that’s what I also realized while I was thinking about all this. That if
I’m ever in question about whether I’m doing it right or not, all I have to ask
myself is, ‘What would my aunt think?’ and I’ll know the answer.
“Can you see it?” she asked me honestly.
“Am I giving you a taste of what my Strategic Objective is? Am I being
clear enough?”
“Sarah,” I smiled, “you leave me speechless.”
“Then, what’s next?” she asked, as she poured each of us a fresh cup of
tea.