# Chapter 19: A Letter to Sarah
book: TheEMythRevisited
pages: 193-197
section_id: chapter-19

--- page 193 ---
19
A LETTER TO SARAH
Freedom does not come automatically; it is achieved. And it is not
gained in a single bound; it must be achieved each day.
Rollo May
Man’s Search for Himself
Dear Sarah,
It has been said that there are no accidents in the universe, and so I might
consider it to be providential that on this very day that I’m writing this letter
to you, I have just finished reading, for the third time, Rollo May’s
remarkable book, Man’s Search for Himself. What a lesson that book holds
for all of us in business who would believe that today’s hot subjects of core
values, meaning, purpose, and empowerment are advanced thinking when, in
fact, Rollo May spoke more eloquently about those very same subjects in
1953!
For that matter, who among us today in business recalls May’s Age of
Anxiety, or Camus, or Dostoyevsky, or Kierkegaard, or Kafka, or Orwell, or
T. S. Eliot in The Hollow Men, or David Riesman in The Lonely Crowd? To
them, however, the question was not one of success in business but of life
and death!
If we had such a yearning for values in 1953 when May’s book was first
published, and we have such a yearning for values today, what has happened
to us in the interim? The Cold War? A trip to the moon? Korea? The Vietnam

--- page 194 ---
War? Cambodia? The Sexual Revolution? The Feminist Revolution? The
Civil Rights Explosion? The Psychological Revolution? The New Age
manifesto and the coming millennium? One hell of a lot I would say! And
yet, after all that, and forty years, we are still searching for meaning, for
something to believe in, and speaking about it as though it were brand new!
What lessons haven’t we learned here at the end of the twentieth century,
Sarah? Maybe we just don’t care enough. Meaning, it seems to me, is the
product of caring, not vice versa. What we care about we value. And so, as I
look around, I see that we are in some very fundamental way disconnected
from caring sufficiently to be able to find true meaning in the things that we
do.
Which is not to say that we don’t care about anything; we obviously do.
We care about making money. We care about being safe. We care about
being protected. We care about the Superbowl.
But I think that the things we have come to care about are insignificant
when placed on the scale that Dostoyevsky, or Camus, or Tolstoy, or
Kierkegaard, or Kafka, or the Old Testament, or the New Testament, or Rollo
May would use. The problem is, Sarah, we’re just not very serious people
these days. We even speak about values, when we speak about them, as
though they were a commodity like a sweater or a pair of Gucci pumps that
can be acquired by writing a check. Much like the Leadership,
Empowerment, Management, Relationship, and Quality Training seminars
that abound today. As though by getting a little training we will suddenly find
ourselves full of more substantial stuff. I think not, Sarah.
I think that we, playing our end game at the bottom of the twentieth
century, are going to need one hell of a lot more than anything our “trainers”
have in store for us. I think we need a shock, a self-administered shock, so
jolting, so outrageous, so unsympathetic to our little wants, that we’ll either
be blown off the planet we’ve each shaped for ourselves—our personal little
spaces—when we least expect it, or we will burn to a crisp right there on the
spot, never to be heard from again.
And therein lies the problem, Sarah, and, of course, the opportunity. How
does one come to the point in his or her life when he or she is not only ready
but eager and willing—however terrifying the prospect might be—to self-
execute such a leap of faith without any guarantees that it will do any good?
That, dear Sarah, is where I believe we left each other not too long ago, at
a crossroads, where I stood and watched you walk off on your newly

--- page 195 ---
discovered path, thinking to myself that I knew where you were going and
what you would discover there, and, at the same time, realizing I knew
nothing of the sort. That the path you had chosen reached both forward in
time and back to your childhood and the “spirit” you had thought you lost.
But what I know to be true from my own life experience is that you will
not truly rediscover your “spirit” in the past but will discover it is waiting for
you in the future on the path you have now chosen. Your spirit isn’t behind
you—it is way ahead of you; it has already made its choice! All that needed
to happen was for you to make yours, and you were together again! Pretty
metaphysical for a hard-headed guy like me, perhaps, but while I can’t prove
it, I know without a shadow of a doubt that it is true.
I know, because the very same thing has happened to me, time and time
again, when I was open to it. I know that my spirit is waiting out there in
front of me on one of any number of a thousand paths, and that it’s up to me
to choose that one path on which my spirit waits, and to step out on it
brightly, without hesitation, to pursue the I, which is the greatest one I can
possibly be. To be spirit-full, that is, spiritual. That is to be in touch with my
soul.
And there, in our spirit, Sarah, is where meaning lies. There, in what your
aunt called caring. It is your spirit that cares, Sarah. While your parents and
teachers thought it was disruptive and tried to take it away from you, your
aunt knew, Sarah, what you’ve just found out. That your spirit was waiting
there all the time! It hadn’t gone anywhere; you had. And the path you are
now on is the same path you and your aunt were on, there in the kitchen, and
there in your little girl’s bed on the summer morning as you breathed in the
rich, delicate summer air, and there among the four oaks, and there with your
hand on the face of the black horse.
Your path has always been there for you, Sarah. You simply got lost. You
didn’t trust it. In your need to be assured, as any little girl would, that your
parents wouldn’t leave you and that your teachers would love you, you
became disconnected from yourself. But, fortunately, not forever.
Because this path you’re now on, this entrepreneurial path, winds around
corners that will amaze you at times, and even shock you at others. To be
sure, it will be anything but certain, but that’s why it is so exciting! It’s the
path of surprise. It’s the path of constant engagement. And because it’s all
those things, it is truly the path of life, or, as Rollo May might have called it,
“the path of freedom.” He said: “Thus freedom is not just the matter of saying

--- page 196 ---
‘Yes’ or ‘No’ to a specific decision: it is the power to mold and create
ourselves. Freedom is the capacity, to use Nietzsche’s phrase, ‘to become
what we truly are.’”1
And so, Sarah, while we have talked a great deal about your business and
its relationship to you, while we have spoken about planning and systems and
controls and management, about people development and organizational
development and marketing development, and all those many parts of your
business you must become not only aware of but attentive to, I would be
remiss if I left you with the impression that any of those things will make any
difference at all unless you remember one thing: keep the curtain up.
The curtain is your Comfort Zone. And your Comfort Zone has been the
false mask you put on when you were a little girl, because it was safe when
your spirit was not. Your Comfort Zone has been the curtain you have placed
in front of your face and through which you view the world. Your Comfort
Zone has been the tight little cozy planet on which you have lived, knowing
all the places to hide because it’s so small. Your Comfort Zone has seized
you before, Sarah, and it can seize you again, when you’re least prepared for
it, because it knows what it means to you. Because it knows how much you
want to be comfortable. Because it knows what price you are willing to pay
for the comfort of being in control. The ultimate price, your life.
So, Sarah, if this new path, if living with your spirit, means anything to
you at all, if you truly care about it, then guard it with your life. Because
Comfort overtakes us all when we’re least prepared for it. Comfort makes
cowards of us all.
And so, good-bye for now. Please let me know how you’re doing; how
the business is going. And remember, my heart will be with you wherever
you are.
Michael E. Gerber

--- page 197 ---
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to the many people with whom
I’ve worked to produce the ideas that are presented in this book, as well as
for the support needed to complete it.
To Ilene Gerber, my wife, partner, and editor, without whose intensity of
purpose, dedication to the truth, and love for the work, both in our business
and in the rest of the life we share together, neither this book, our business,
nor our marriage would have been possible.
To Shana, Kim, Hillary, Sam, and Alex Olivia, my children, who have
given to me more than they have received, in ways only a father can truly
know.
To all my associates at E-Myth Worldwide, present and past, whose
commitment to the ideas in this book, as well as to each other and our clients,
have given meaning to the words by living them, even when it was
impossible and when there seemed to be no good reason for doing so.
To all our thousands of clients over the years who have put their trust in
our integrity, and, in the process, caught us at least as much as we taught
them about what it means to transcend scarcity with excellence.
To Nancy and Bob Dreyfus, my sister-in-law and brother-in-law, whose
wisdom, love, and generous spirits have touched me more than they can
possibly know.
To Virginia Smith at HarperBusiness, whose caring, intelligent friendship
has seen me through the most dismal moments of writing with a gentle, open,
and willing nature that enabled me to be myself in the moments I least
wanted to be, without apology or explanation.
And, finally, to all my readers who continue to support my work so
enthusiastically.
Thank you all.