# Chapter 14: Your Organizational Strategy
book: TheEMythRevisited
pages: 129-144
section_id: chapter-14

--- page 129 ---
14
YOUR ORGANIZATIONAL
STRATEGY
All organizations are hierarchical. At each level people serve under
those above them. An organization is therefore a structured
institution. If it is not structured, it is a mob. Mobs do not get things
done, they destroy things.
Theodore Levitt
Management for Business Growth
Everyone wants to “get organized.” But when you suggest that they start by
creating an Organization Chart, all you get is doubtful—and sometimes
hostile—stares.
“Don’t be ridiculous,” a client once retorted. “We’re just a small
company. We don’t need an Organization Chart. We need better people!”
Despite his protestations, I persisted.
Because I knew something he didn’t.
I knew that the organizational development reflected in the Organization
Chart can have a more profound impact on a small company than any other
single Business Development step.
Organizing Around Personalities

--- page 130 ---
Most companies organize around personalities rather than around
functions.
That is, around people rather than accountabilities or responsibilities.
The result is almost always chaos.
To best show you what I mean, let’s take a look at Widget Makers, a new
company formed by Jack and Murray Hopeful, brothers and now partners, in
an enterprise that they are sure will make them rich.
Jack and Murray start their partnership as most do, by sharing the work.
When Jack’s not making the widget, Murray is.
When Jack’s not helping the customer, Murray is.
When Murray’s not doing the books, Jack is.
In the beginning, the business hums like a well-oiled machine.
The shop is spotless.
The windows gleam.
The floors are meticulous.
The customers smile.
And Jack and Murray hustle.
Taking turns, always taking turns.
On Monday, Murray opens up. On Tuesday, Jack. On Wednesday,
Murray. On Thursday, Jack.
After all, they’re partners aren’t they?
If they don’t do it, who will? It’s only fair that they share the work.
And they go on that way. And the business begins to grow.
All of a sudden, there’s more work than either Murray or Jack can handle.
They have to get help.
So they hire Jerry. A great guy. And a nephew to boot.
As long as they have to pay someone, might as well keep it in the family.
Now it’s Jack, Murray, and Jerry, taking turns, taking turns.
When Jack’s not doing the books, Murray is.
And when Murray and Jack aren’t, Jerry is.
Now when Murray isn’t working with a customer, either Jack or Jerry is.
Or when Jack isn’t opening up, Murray is, or Jerry.
Things are moving. The business is jumping. Jack and Murray and Jerry
are as busy as three people can be.
It isn’t long before Herb joins them. Jack’s wife’s brother. A good guy. A
hard worker. Willing and eager.
Now it’s Jack, Murray, Jerry, and Herb, taking turns, taking turns.

--- page 131 ---
When Jack’s not doing the books, Herb is, or Murray, or Jerry.
When Murray’s not working with a customer, it’s Jack or Jerry or Herb.
When Jerry’s not making widgets, it’s Murray or Jack or Herb.
Everybody’s opening up, answering the telephone, going out for
sandwiches, making deposits—taking turns, taking turns, taking turns.
But suddenly the widgets begin to come back. They don’t seem to be
working like they used to.
“We never had this trouble before,” says Jack to Murray. Murray looks at
Herb. Herb looks at Jerry.
All of a sudden, the books begin to look funny.
“We never had this trouble before,” says Murray to Jack. Jack looks at
Jerry. Jerry looks at Herb.
And that’s not all.
The shop is beginning to fall apart.
Tools are missing.
Dust is getting in the widgets.
Corrugated cardboard is strewn about the work table.
Nails are in the screw boxes and screws in the nail boxes.
Jack and Murray and Jerry and Herb are beginning to bump into each
other on their way in and out.
They’re elbowing for room in the work space.
Windows aren’t getting cleaned.
Floors aren’t getting swept.
Tempers begin to mount.
But who’s to say something? And what? And to whom?
If everybody’s doing everything, then who’s accountable for anything?
If Jack and Murray are partners, who’s in charge?
If both, then what happens when Jack tells Jerry to do something that
Murray won’t allow him to do?
When Herb wants to go for lunch, who does he tell—Jack? Murray?
Jerry?
Who’s accountable for making certain that the store is manned?
When the widgets go bad, who’s accountable for correcting the
condition?
When the books are unbalanced, who’s accountable for balancing them?
When the floors need cleaning, when the windows need washing, when
the shop needs opening or closing, when the customers need tending—who’s

--- page 132 ---
accountable for producing the results?
What Jack and Murray don’t understand is that without an Organization
Chart, everything hinges on luck and good feelings, on the personalities of
the people and the goodwill they share.
Unfortunately, personalities, good feelings, goodwill, and luck aren’t the
only ingredients of a successful organization; alone, they are the recipe for
chaos and disaster.
Organization needs something more.
Organizing Your Company
Let’s start Widget Makers all over again.
Jack and Murray Hopeful are sitting in their kitchen.
They have decided to form Widget Makers.
They are excited about its prospects but know that if it’s to succeed they
have to approach it differently from the way most people start a new
business.
The first thing they decide to do is to think about the business as a
corporation, rather than as a partnership.
Rather than thinking of themselves as partners, they now think of
themselves as shareholders.
Having both worked in partnerships with other people—and failed—Jack
and Murray know that there’s nothing more disastrous than a partnership
gone bad, as so many do.
Unless it’s a family business, that is.
Jack and Murray already know that family businesses are even worse than
partnerships.
But a partnership that’s also a family business?
No. Jack and Murray decide to do it a different way.
Sitting there at the kitchen table, Jack and Murray each take a blank piece
of paper and print their names at the top of the page.
Under each name they print “Primary Aim.”
For the next hour or so, Jack and Murray each visualizes how he would
like his life to look and writes his conclusions on the page in front of him.
Then they spend another hour or so talking about what they wrote,
sharing their personal dreams with each other, perhaps discovering in that
hour more about each other than they had known in all their years as brothers.

--- page 133 ---
The next step Jack and Murray take is to draw a line across a blank piece
of paper about a third of the way down. Above the line they write in bold
letters the word SHAREHOLDERS. They have agreed with each other that
is to be their role outside of the business.
Inside of the business, they have agreed, they will from this time forward
think of themselves as EMPLOYEES.
They realize this will save them a lot of trouble later on.
The next step will require some time: the creation of the Strategic
Objective for Widget Makers, Inc. Jack and Murray go at it enthusiastically.
Murray agrees to do the necessary research concerning the Central
Demographic Model they have tentatively chosen. How many potential
buyers are there in the territory in which they’ve decided to do business? Is
the population growing? What is the competition? How are widgets priced
and how are they selling? Is there a future for widgets in the territory? What
is the anticipated growth of the territory? Any zoning changes expected?
Murray also agrees to create a questionnaire and mail it to a sample of
their Central Demographic Model consumers to find out how they feel
they’re treated by other widget companies. At the same time, Murray is to
personally call 150 of those consumers. He’ll conduct a Needs Analysis to
get a better understanding of how they think and feel about widgets. What do
widgets mean to them? How have widgets changed their lives? If they could
have any kind of widget at all, what would it look like? How would it feel to
use it? What do they want a good widget to do for them?
Murray agrees to do the research by a certain date.
Meanwhile, Jack agrees to pull together the preliminary financial data
needed to secure a loan from the bank—an operating pro forma and a cash
flow projection for the first year of operation.
Once the information about the consumer, the competition, and the
pricing is collected, Jack and Murray will meet again and complete their
Strategic Objective and plug in the final numbers needed for the loan.
Luck is with them. The information Murray collects about their Central
Demographic Model, the competition, and the pricing is more than
encouraging.
They complete their Strategic Objective and then begin the task of
organizational development—the creation of their Organization Chart.
Since their Strategic Objective has indicated how they will be doing
business (one location, assembling and selling widgets and widget-related

--- page 134 ---
accessories to a specific consumer within the territory described as North
Marine West), Jack and Murray agree that their Organization Chart will
require the following positions:
• President and Chief Operating Officer (COO), accountable for the
overall achievement of the Strategic Objective and reporting to the
SHAREHOLDERS who include, on an equal basis, Jack and Murray.
• Vice-President/Marketing, accountable for finding customers and
finding new ways to provide customers with the satisfactions they
derive from widgets, at lower cost, and with greater ease, and reporting
to the COO.
• Vice-President/Operations, accountable for keeping customers by
delivering to them what is promised by Marketing, and for discovering
new ways of assembling widgets, at lower cost, and with greater
efficiency so as to provide the customer with better service, reporting
to the COO.
• Vice-President/Finance, accountable for supporting both Marketing and
Operations in the fulfillment of their accountabilities by achieving the
company’s profitability standards, and by securing capital whenever
it’s needed, and at the best rates, also reporting to the COO.
• Reporting to the Vice-President/Marketing are two positions: Sales
Manager and Advertising/Research Manager.
• Reporting to the Vice-President/Operations are three positions:
Production Manager, Service Manager, and Facilities Manager.
• Reporting to the Vice-President/Finance are two positions: Accounts
Receivable Manager and Accounts Payable Manager.
Jack and Murray sit back and look at the completed Organization Chart of
Widget Makers, Inc., and smile. It sure looks like a big company. The only
problem is that Jack and Murray’s names will have to fill all the boxes!
They’re the only two employees.
But what they have effectively done is describe all the work that’s going
to be done in Widget Makers, Inc., when its full potential is realized.
More importantly, they have described the work that has to be done right
away!
Jack and Murray realize that there’s no difference between the Widget
Makers of today and the Widget Makers of tomorrow; the work is the same;

--- page 135 ---
only the faces will change.
The next job jack and Murray take on is writing a Position Contract for
each position on their Organization Chart.
A Position Contract (as we call it at E-Myth Worldwide) is a summary of
the results to be achieved by each position in the company, the work the
occupant of that position is accountable for, a list of standards by which the
results are to be evaluated, and a line for the signature of the person who
agrees to fulfill those accountabilities.
Jack and Murray know that a Position Contract is not a job description.
It is a contract, rather than just a description, between the company and an
employee, a summary of the rules of the company’s game.
It provides each person in an organization with a sense of commitment
and accountability.
Accountability literally means “stand up and be counted.”
Therefore, the Position Contract is the document that identifies who’s to
stand up and what they’re being counted on to produce.
Widget Makers, Inc.
Organization Chart

--- page 137 ---
Having completed the Position Contracts for the positions within their
new company, Jack and Murray, as shareholders, proceed to the most critical
task of their new association: naming the people to put in the boxes.
And since there are only two of them, it becomes even more critical that
they approach this task wisely and carefully, if they’re to avoid the errors of
their past.
Once they have that settled, they go below the horizontal line and in the
middle of the piece of paper they draw a box in which they write the letters
COO, for Chief Operating Officer, or President, of their new corporation.
The next most difficult step, of course, is to decide which one of them is
going to fill that position, understanding that it can be only one of them.
There can’t be two Chief Operating Officers of a company. Someone’s got to
be accountable. Someone’s got to be in charge.
Will it be Jack? Will it be Murray?
They ponder the question seriously.
This is the person fulfilling the role that will ultimately be accountable to
Jack and Murray for the realization of their dream.
After careful thought, Murray decides on his own that Jack should do it.
Although Murray is the older brother, he knows in his heart that Jack has
always taken his accountabilities more seriously.
Jack has always been more thorough than Murray. While Murray has
always been the more creative of the two, creativity is not necessarily what’s
called for here—organization is.
After all, their life savings are at stake.
If the business is to give them both what they want, someone will have to
take it very seriously indeed.
Murray confers with Jack about his decision.
They both understand what’s at stake here. A commitment of trust, both
to each other and to the Strategic Objective they have fashioned together with
great care.
They both understand this is more than just a job: it’s a heartfelt
commitment.
After a long discussion, they agree on Jack for COO, and Jack solemnly
accepts the position, as well as the authority that goes with it, by signing the
Position Contract for COO, or President.
Next come the three Vice-Presidential positions: Marketing, Operations,

--- page 138 ---
and Finance.
Jack asks Murray if he would agree to be Vice-President/Marketing, since
he did such an exceptional job on the marketing research project at the outset
of their venture.
Murray agrees enthusiastically—this is the work he had hoped to do all
along—and gladly signs the Vice-President/Marketing Position Contract.
Jack then signs Murray’s Position Contract as the President (the Vice-
President/Marketing’s manager) on behalf of the company.
Next comes Vice-President/Operations. Jack agrees to take this position
because it will be difficult, he reasons with Murray, for Murray to both sell
the widgets and make them at the same time. This time Jack signs the
Position Contract both as Vice-President/Operations and as President.
Finally, Jack takes on the accountability of Vice-President/Finance, and
signs the Position Contract for that position. There’s no question between
Jack and Murray who’s best suited for that job.
Murray now assumes the positions of Sales Manager and
Advertising/Research Manager, and signs those Position Contracts.
Jack takes the positions of Production Manager, Service Manager, and
Facilities Manager, as well as those of Accounts Payable Manager and
Accounts Receivable Manager, and signs those Position Contracts.
With all Position Contracts signed, Jack and Murray sit back for a second
time to survey what they’ve done. When they see it, they’re shocked! Jack
has been given eight jobs to Murray’s three! Something’s got to be changed.
After some thought, they agree to have Murray take on the
accountabilities of Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable as well as that
of Service Manager.
That makes it six jobs each.
Anyone should be able to do six jobs on an average day, Jack and Murray
think to themselves ambitiously.
And, finally, the organization is done!
Not a bit of work had been performed on the job, and yet the two of them
were able to conceive of the company, the work that needs to be done, the
standards by which they would hold each position accountable, and which
position is accountable to which position and specifically for what.
And upon completing this one preparatory act, a sense of order swept
through Jack and Murray. A sense of elation.
For despite the obvious size of the job ahead, somehow it looked doable.

--- page 139 ---
Somehow Jack and Murray knew they were going to get it all done.
They were organized.
They had some semblance of a plan.
In creating their Organization Chart, Jack and Murray had also generated
the blueprint for their Franchise Prototype.
Prototyping the Position: Replacing Yourself with a System
Having created a picture of the business as it will look when it’s finally
done, Jack and Murray start the prototyping process.
But at the bottom of the organization, not at the top.
They start working on the business where they start working in the
business.
In the position of Salesperson and Production Person and Accounts
Receivable Clerk.
Not as the owners or partners or shareholders. Not as the COO or the
VP/Marketing.
But as employees, at the very bottom of the organization. Doing Tactical
Work, not Strategic Work.
Tactical Work is the work all technicians do.
Strategic Work is the work their managers do.
If Jack and Murray’s business is going to thrive, they have to find other
people to do the Tactical Work so as to free Jack and Murray to do the
Strategic Work.
The Organization Chart is the means through which that critical transition
can be made.
Let’s watch as Jack and Murray go through the same growth process they
experienced at the beginning of this chapter, but this time avoiding their
earlier disaster by prototyping the positions in their Organization Chart.
Jack and Murray go to work in their business. But now with a difference.
They are no longer interested in working in their business. They are now
focused on developing a business that works. To do that they begin to work
in an entirely different way.
As Murray goes to work in the position of Salesperson, he also goes to
work on the position of Salesperson as Vice-President/Marketing.
As Jack goes to work in the position of Production Person, he also goes to
work on the position of Production Person as Vice-President/Operations.

--- page 140 ---
In other words, Murray and Jack start building their business by looking
at each position in the business as though it were a Franchise Prototype of its
own.
As Murray goes to work in the position of Salesperson as a Salesperson,
he also goes to work on the position of Salesperson by implementing the
Business Development Process of Innovation, Quantification, and
Orchestration.
Likewise, when Jack goes to work in the position of Production Person as
a Production Person, he goes to work on the position of Production Person by
implementing the Business Development Process of Innovation,
Quantification, and Orchestration.
Each of them asks, “What would best serve our customer here? How
could I most easily give the customer what he wants while also maximizing
profits for the company? And at the same time, how could I give the person
responsible for that work the best possible experience?”
Murray begins to test the clothing he wears as a Salesperson to see what
colors and styles produce the greatest positive impact on the customers.
He starts testing different words.
He begins to think about how Widget Makers, Inc., interacts with its
customers, and how each component of this interaction could be modified to
increase its effectiveness.
And as he quantifies the impact of his innovations on sales, he takes the
most productive of them and writes them down in the Widget Makers Sales
Operations Manual.
Before long, the Sales Operations Manual contains the exact scripts for
handling incoming calls, outgoing calls, meeting the customer at the door.
The exact responses to customer inquiries, complaints, concerns. The system
by which an order is entered, returns are transacted, new product requests are
acted upon, inventory is secured.
Only when the Sales Operations Manual is complete does Murray run an
ad for a salesperson.
But not for someone with sales experience.
Not a Master Technician. But a novice. A beginner. An Apprentice.
Someone eager to learn how to do it right.
Someone willing to learn what Murray has spent so much time and
energy discovering.
Someone for whom questions haven’t become answers.

--- page 141 ---
Someone who is open to the possibility of learning skills he hasn’t
developed yet, skills he wants to learn.
And the ad is placed under Sales in the Classified Section of the Sunday
paper. It reads: COME AND SEE OUR TURN-KEY OPERATION. COME
AND SEE OUR MONEY MACHINE. NO EXPERIENCE NECESSARY.
JUST AN OPEN MIND AND A WILLINGNESS TO LEARN.
And as Murray interviews the candidates, he shows them the Sales
Operations Manual and Widget Makers’ Strategic Objective, and explains
how they were created and why.
He tells them the story of Widget Makers, the dream he and Jack
conceived, to enable them to make a personal difference in the market in
which they have chosen to become leaders.
He shows them the Organization Chart, where the position of Salesperson
is, to which position it reports, and who in Widget Makers is currently
accountable for that position.
He talks to them about their Primary Aim to determine who among them
has a vision that coincides with Widget Makers’ view of the world.
And when he finds the right person, Murray hires him, hands him the
Sales Operations Manual, has him memorize the words in it, dress to code,
learn the systems, and finally, go to work. Using the Sales System, Murray
innovated, quantified, and orchestrated.
At that moment, at that exact instant, Murray moves up to the position of
Sales Manager and begins the process of Business Development all over
again.
Because at that moment, Murray has taken the most important step in
freeing himself from the Tactical Work of his business. Murray has replaced
himself with a system that works in the hands of a person who wants to work
it.
And now Murray’s job becomes managing the system rather than doing
the work.
Murray is now engaged in Strategic Work.
And while Murray did that, Jack did the very same thing for each of the
Tactical Work positions he was responsible for!
Both of them working on the business while working in it, and all
according to plan.
Now Jack and Murray have learned, by experience, an important lesson in
developing their business, a lesson every Technician suffering from an

--- page 142 ---
Entrepreneurial Seizure must learn if his business and his life are to work in
harmony.
That your Organization Chart flows down from your Strategic Objective,
which in turn flows down from your Primary Aim.
That each is the cause of the one preceding it, and each, therefore, plays a
part in the fulfillment of the one before it.
A logic is established, an integrated whole.
In this example, Widget Makers, Inc., became an orderly system for
creating and re-creating Jack and Murray’s lives.
Without the Organization Chart, confusion, discord, and conflict become
the order of the day.
But with it, the direction, purpose, and style of the business are balanced,
interacting purposefully and progressing with intention and integrity toward a
cohesive and sensible whole.
Finally, good people could come together and get something done!
Sarah exhaled loudly and stretched, both arms extending fully toward the
ceiling as though she was letting go of a feeling she was having difficulty
handling.
“Boy,” she said, “you sure don’t make it easy. The minute I think I’ve got
this entrepreneurial thing handled, you give me some more work to do.
“I’d like to go back over this again because I’m not sure I’ve got it.
“What you’re saying is that I need to create an Organization Chart for All
About Pies as it will look when it’s done, seven years from now, rather than
the way it is now?”
“Yes,” I responded.
“And that once I’ve created that Organization Chart, I need to put my
name in all the positions I currently fill?”
“Right again,” I answered.
“And that I need to create very detailed descriptions of each one of those
positions, and then sign the Position Contracts for each, as though I were an
employee taking responsibility for each job? Do you mean I actually need to
sign each Position Contract, exactly as though I were that employee?”
“Yes,” I said, “exactly as though you were that employee. Because if your
business is going to work, you are each one of those employees! Until you
replace yourself with someone else, that is.”
She continued to press forward, her eyes shining like diamonds, intense,

--- page 143 ---
awake, engaged.
“And the reason for that is,” Sarah said, “that unless I act as I expect my
employees to act, unless I work in my business exactly as I wish them to, I
will never be able to create a system for doing it exactly the way I expect
them to do it.
“In other words, unless I act in exactly the same way as I expect my
employees to act, the system I create will indulge my preferences, rather than
what the business really needs to make it possible for everyone other than me
to be as productive and happy as possible.
“And if I only indulge my preferences, I will never be able to replace
myself with anyone other than another owner, someone just like me, someone
with the same interests as an owner, someone with the same goals as mine.”
She paused for a moment as though to catch her breath, and then added,
“Is that what you are saying?”
“Exactly!” I answered. “Because it’s critical if you are to begin your
business all over again that you’re able to separate yourself from the roles
you need to play. To become independent of them, rather than these roles
becoming dependent on you.
“Remember we talked earlier about the crazy-making nature of all your
different personalities, and that the only way to eliminate that craziness is to
organize yourself and the world around you as clearly as possible so you can
function as clearly as possible?
“Well, it’s the dysfunctional nature of these unconscious personalities we
have to combat.
“It’s our automatic nature we’ve got to organize into an intentional
nature.
“And the only way we can do that is intentionally, not automatically.
“And so one part of us, the part a man named Gurdjieff once called the
‘driver,’ must order all the rest.
“The driver must take charge of the horse and carriage, Gurdjieff once
said.
“And, as the owner of your business, as the driver of your business, that’s
your primary job: to take charge of the horse and carriage.
“And, to do so, you must be able to differentiate among all the roles, to
discriminate between what’s most important and what’s least important, to
organize it in such a way that your best intelligence tells you your business
must work.

--- page 144 ---
“And, once you have done that, once you’ve organized your business in
the most intelligent way you can, your next most important job is to follow
the rules of the game you have created with integrity.
“Because if you won’t follow the rules, why should anyone else?
“If the rules don’t apply to you, the leader, why should you expect anyone
to follow you?
“If you don’t obey the rules, honor them, extol them, why should you
expect anyone else to take your game seriously?
“The answer is, you can’t expect them to, because they won’t!
“And that’s what this whole process of organizational development is. It’s
the process through which you think through your business as best as you’re
able and then structure the way it is to work. Your Organization Chart is that
structure. It is you talking to your people and the world, telling them exactly
how you see your business working when it’s done. When the dream is in
place. It’s you sharing your mind with the world. And then, once having
shared it, it’s you telling your people and the world that you believe enough
in the vision to live it yourself!
“Anything less than that is sheer arrogance,” I told her.
“But, when you live by your own rules, when you ‘walk your talk,’ when
you live as you think, then your business will become a thing to behold.”
“Got it!” she said.
“I didn’t have a doubt in the world but you would,” I responded.
“So, let’s go on to Management Development,” I said to Sarah, as I
poured her a fresh cup of tea, “and then to People Development.
“Because where management, people, and systems come together, so
does your Prototype.”