# Chapter 18: Your Systems Strategy
book: TheEMythRevisited
pages: 179-192
section_id: chapter-18

--- page 179 ---
18
YOUR SYSTEMS STRATEGY
The world thus appears as a complicated tissue of events, in which
connections of different kinds alternate or overlap or combine and
thereby determine the texture of the whole.
Werner Heisenberg
Physics and Philosophy
Throughout this book I have talked about systems without really defining
what a system is. So let me do that here.
A system is a set of things, actions, ideas, and information that interact
with each other, and in so doing, alter other systems.
In short, everything is a system. The universe, the world, San Francisco
Bay, the office I’m sitting in, the word processor I’m using, the cup of coffee
I’m drinking, the relationship you and I are having—they’re all systems.
Some systems we can understand and some we can’t.
Let’s take a look at the ones we can.
The systems in your business.
Three Kinds of Systems

--- page 180 ---
There are three kinds of systems in your business: Hard Systems, Soft
Systems, and Information Systems.
Hard Systems are inanimate, unliving things. My computer is a Hard
System, as are the colors in this office’s reception area.
Soft Systems are either animate—living—or ideas. You are a Soft
System; so is the script for Hamlet.
Information Systems are those that provide us with information about the
interaction between the other two. Inventory control, cash flow forecasting,
and sales activity summary reports are all Information Systems.
The Innovation, Quantification, Orchestration, and integration of these
three kinds of systems in your business is what your Business Development
Program is all about.
What follows are examples of each, and how they integrate to produce a
desirable result.
Hard Systems
At E-Myth Worldwide, we used to use “white boards” extensively in
seminars, internal meetings, and conferences with clients and prospective
clients. Since the vast majority of our work with clients is done by telephone,
fax, and mail—rather than in our facilities as we did when The E-Myth was
first published in 1986—we have few such meetings today.
As you’ve probably guessed by now, our facilities were operated (and, of
course, still are) under rigid standards of color and cleanliness.
Color standards at the time dictated that we use white boards, rather than
black ones, and blue markers, rather than white chalk. Unfortunately, our
color standards also dictated that our walls be white.
It wasn’t long before a conflict developed between our standards of
cleanliness and our standards of color.
At the end of a seminar, a meeting, or a conference, the person
accountable for that particular event was to leave the room in the order in
which he found it. This included cleaning the board-work, which was not our
employees’ favorite job.
Not that they wouldn’t do it; they would. But in their haste to get it done
so they could get on with the work they preferred to do, the eraser would
often fly uncontrollably over the edge of the board.
It wasn’t long before our once gleaming white walls began to show ugly
streaks and smudges of IBM-blue ink!

--- page 181 ---
It drove us crazy.
We mounted an all-out campaign.
We held Blue Ink On the Walls Meetings.
We wrote memos entitled:
TO: All Personnel.
SUBJECT: Blue Ink on Walls.
We created new Board Cleaning Policies. We created Cleaning Teams.
We created Wall Tours. We created Board Spot Checks. We installed signs
above every board saying: BE CAREFUL!
But no matter what we did, no matter how hard we tried, no matter what
we said to our normally meticulous people—blue ink got on the walls. Our
only apparent recourse was to paint the walls white over and over again or go
back to black boards and white chalk.
Neither was acceptable.
And that’s how our Prevent-a-Smudge System was born.
We had one standard that insisted on impeccably clean walls and another
standard that made the first one seemingly impossible to uphold (white
boards, white walls, blue ink). In short, we had a conflict between what we
wanted and what we had.
The two necessary components of conflict.
The essential conditions for innovation.
The conditions that give birth to a system.
But a third component was needed to translate the conflict we were
experiencing into remedial action: will.
We were determined to lick the problem, and would not rest until we had.
Will applied to any conflict creates energy.
Conflict without will creates frustration. An engine turning, but going
nowhere.
Conflict with will creates resolution, a movement beyond the dilemma.
Voilà! The E-Myth Worldwide Prevent-a-Smudge System!
It was so obvious. So simple.
We installed a clear Lucite collar around each board.
Extending four inches out from each edge of the board, the Lucite collar
literally stopped the blue ink carnage in its tracks!

--- page 182 ---
In one fell swoop, the walls were clean.
Our people were delighted; our clients amazed.
The constant painting, memo writing, sign creating, team invading, policy
polluting activities that had pervaded our organization for more than three
weeks were history.
And all because of a four-inch Lucite collar!
A Hard System for producing a human and totally integrated result.
A system solution to a typically people-intensive problem. Without
anyone having to pay attention to it. Leaving me free to write this book, or
anything else I cared to do.
After all, that’s the purpose of a system—to free you to do the things you
want to do.
Soft Systems
Things need to be sold.
And it’s usually people who have to sell them.
Everyone in business has heard the old saw: 80 percent of our sales are
produced by 20 percent of our people.
Unfortunately, few seem to know what the 20 percent are doing that the
80 percent aren’t.
Well, let me tell you.
The 20 percent are using a system, and the 80 percent aren’t.
A selling system is a Soft System.
And I’ve seen such systems produce 100 percent to 500 percent increases
in sales in almost no time!
What is a selling system? It’s a fully orchestrated interaction between you
and your customer that follows six primary steps:
1. Identification of the specific Benchmarks—or consumer decision points—
in your selling process.
2. The literal scripting of the words that will get you to each one successfully
(yes, written down like the script for a play!).
3. The creation of the various materials to be used with each script.
4. The memorization of each Benchmark’s script.
5. The delivery of each script by your salespeople in identical fashion.
6. Leaving your people to communicate more effectively, by articulating,
watching, listening, hearing, acknowledging, understanding, and engaging

--- page 183 ---
each and every prospect as fully as he needs to be.
At E-Myth Worldwide, we call it the Power Point Selling System.
A career development company we worked with put it in the hands of
people with no experience, and revenues increased 300 percent in one year.
An advertising agency put it in the hands of people with no experience in
either selling or advertising, and revenues increased 500 percent in two years.
A health spa put it in the hands of people with no experience, and
revenues increased 40 percent in two months.
If you put it to work in your company, it will do the same for you, no
matter what kind of business you’re in.
The Power Point Selling System is composed of two parts: Structure and
Substance. Structure is what you do. Substance is how you do it.
The Structure of the System is all of the predetermined elements of the
Process, and includes exactly what you say, the materials you use when you
say it, and what you wear.
The Substance of the System is what you—the salesperson—bring to the
Process, and includes how you say it, how you use it when you say it, and
how you are when you say it.
Structure and Substance merge in the selling process to produce a far
more extraordinary result than any single salesperson could if left to his own
devices.
Let’s look more specifically at the most important component of the
Power Point Selling System—what you say. Or what we call at E-Myth
Worldwide, the Power Point Selling Process.
THE POWER POINT SELLING PROCESS
The Power Point Selling Process is actually a series of scripts defining the
entire interaction between the salesperson and the customer.
These scripts (or Benchmarks) are:
1. The Appointment Presentation
2. The Needs Analysis Presentation
3. The Solutions Presentation
THE APPOINTMENT PRESENTATION Most salespeople fail at the
outset of the selling process because they don’t realize the purpose of an
Appointment Presentation.

--- page 184 ---
Most believe that the purpose of an Appointment Presentation is to
qualify the customer and ascertain whether or not he is a viable prospect. It’s
not.
The purpose of an Appointment Presentation is one thing and one thing
only: to make an appointment.
The Appointment Presentation moves the prospect from where he is to the
second Benchmark in the process, the Needs Analysis Presentation.
It is a series of words, delivered on the telephone or in person, that engage
the prospect’s unconscious (remember?) by speaking primarily about the
product you have to sell rather than the commodity.
For example:
“Hi, Mr. Jackson. I’m Johnny Jones with Walter Mitty Company. Have
you seen the remarkable new things that are being done to control money
these days?”
“What new things?”
“Well, that’s exactly why I called. May I have a moment of your
time?”
The product? Financial control. Control is the key. The presentation tells
Mr. Jackson that there are things going on in the world—“remarkable new
things”—that he doesn’t know about (he’s out of control), but he can now
become familiar with them (gain control!) by just spending a few moments
with Johnny Jones.
And it tells him that instantly! Mr. Jackson’s emotional commitment is
already made. All that he needs now is to find the rational armament to
support it. That’s what Johnny Jones’s job is. That’s why the appointment
will be made.
Simple and effective. It makes appointments.
To do what?
To deliver the Needs Analysis Presentation.
THE NEEDS ANALYSIS PRESENTATION The first thing you do in
a Needs Analysis Presentation is repeat what you said in the Appointment
Presentation to reestablish the emotional commitment:
“Remember, Mr. Jackson, when we first talked I mentioned that some

--- page 185 ---
remarkable new things were going on in the world to control money?”
The second thing you do is tell the prospect how you would like to
proceed to fulfill your promise to him:
“Well, what I’d like to do is to tell you about those things. At the same
time, I’d like to show you some incredibly effective ways my firm, Walter
Mitty Company, has developed to help you to control money here in your
business Okay?”
The third thing you do is to establish your credibility in the prospect’s
mind by communicating two things. First, your company’s expertise is such
matters: “We are Money-Controlling Specialists” (we, at E-Myth Worldwide,
call that a Positioning Statement). And second, your personal willingness to
do whatever is necessary to utilize that expertise on his behalf:
“Let me tell you why we created our company, Mr. Jackson. We’ve found
that people like yourself are continually frustrated by not being able to
get the most out of their money. Frustrated by paying higher interest
rates than they have to. By working with financial experts who don’t seem
to know what they’re doing. By banking with a bank that doesn’t seem to
have their best interest at heart” And so on.
“Do these things ever frustrate you. Mr Jackson? Of course they do
And that’s why Walter Mitty Company has created a Money-Controlling
System that makes it possible for you to get the most preferential
treatment in the financial arena while paying the least for it. Now I know
that sounds too good to be true. But let me explain how we propose to go
about doing that for you….”
Here Johnny Jones is communicating that he understands what frustrates
Mr. Jackson, and that he has the expertise to alleviate those frustrations—not
personally but systematically—through the use of the Walter Mitty
Company’s Money-Controlling System.
The fourth thing you do in a Needs Analysis Presentation is describe the
Walter Mitty Company’s Money-Controlling System and why it works so
well. Not what it does but the impact it will have on the prospect:

--- page 186 ---
“The Walter Mitty Company’s Money-Controlling System is designed to
do three things, Mr. Jackson.
“First, it enables us to know what specifically bothers you about
controlling your money. Because we know that controlling money must be
personally tailored to each and every one of our clients. In order to do
that we’ve created what we call at Walter Mitty Company a Money
Management Questionnaire. By asking you these particular questions,
we’re well on our way to helping you get what you want. Before I leave
today, I’ll review the Questionnaire with you.
“Once the Questionnaire is completed, we return it to our Financial
Systems Group. This is a group of financial specialists who review your
Questionnaire to make certain that it has been completed accurately.
“If it has, they enter the information into our Money-Controlling
System that has been designed to analyze this information and compare it
with the broad spectrum of data we’ve assembled over the years. Once
having analyzed the information, the System will then create personally
tailored solutions just for you, Mr. Jackson. Ways to secure the kind of
preferential treatment we talked about earlier, but at the lowest possible
cost. Ways of controlling your money and using it to your advantage, not
someone else’s.
“These solutions will then be prepared in the form of a Financial
Report that I’ll deliver to you personally and review with you at that time.
“Should any of our solutions make sense to you, we’ll be more than
happy to help you implement them. If not, then at least we’ll have started
the process of becoming better acquainted so that we may be of
assistance to you some other time.
“In any case, the Financial Report is yours—at absolutely no cost
whatsoever. It’s our way of saying we’re serious about what we do, and
would be happy to work with you, whether now or in the future.
“So let’s review the Questionnaire together, and when we’re done I’ll
provide you with a summary of some of the remarkable new things that
are happening in the world to control money. And then I’ll take your
information back so we can prepare your Financial Report. Okay?”
The fifth thing Johnny Jones does in the Needs Analysis Presentation is
complete the Money Management Questionnaire.

--- page 187 ---
The sixth thing Johnny Jones does is provide the prospective customer
with the information he promised and show him how relevant it is to the
Financial Report he will be preparing for him. (He could have done this at the
outset of their meeting, during the Needs Analysis questioning process, or
now, at the end.)
The seventh thing Johnny Jones does in the Needs Analysis Presentation
is make an appointment with the prospective customer to return with the
Financial Report, reminding him that Johnny Jones will have some valuable
solutions for him—at no cost!—and that Johnny will take whatever time is
necessary to help the prospective customer understand those solutions,
whether he decides to implement them or not!
Upon completion of the Needs Analysis Presentation, Johnny Jones will
have made an appointment that will bring him to the third Benchmark in the
Power Point Selling Process, the Solutions Presentation.
THE SOLUTIONS PRESENTATION The Solutions Presentation is the
easiest component of the Power Point Selling Process. Because if Johnny
Jones has done his job effectively up to this point, the sale is already made.
Most salespeople think that selling is “closing.” It isn’t. Selling is
opening. That’s what the Needs Analysis Presentation does. It opens up the
prospective customer to a deeper experience of his frustration and to the
opportunities available to him by going through the questioning process with
you.
You now have something to give him.
“Remarkable new things” that will make it possible for him to receive
“preferential treatment” in the “financial arena” so as to secure the kind of
“control” over his money he “deserves” and at a “preferentially” low cost.
In other words, by knowing you (or Johnny Jones), your prospective
customer is going to: (1) be on the inside of the financial winners circle with
people who are in the know; (2) be treated like important people are; (3) use
money like the “pros” do; and (4) gain control over his life.
And he’s going to get all of this without paying too high a price for it!
What more could anyone ask for?
The Solutions Presentation simply provides the rational armament for the
emotional commitment (remember that?).
Here Johnny Jones brings the prospect up-to-date by reviewing
everything he said and did during the Needs Analysis Presentation. The

--- page 188 ---
prospect has forgotten all those psychographically compelling things by now.
But he won’t for long—they’re a part of him.
Then Johnny Jones reviews in great, patient, and earnest detail every last
word, comma, and number in his prospective customer’s Financial Report!
He asks questions to make certain that the prospect feels that this is his
Financial Report, not Walter Mitty Company’s.
And when Johnny Jones is done, when he’s reviewed all of the
components of the Financial Report prepared just for his prospect, Mr.
Jackson, he asks him this question: “Of the options we’ve suggested here,
Mr. Jackson, which do you feel would best serve you right now?” And then
waits for the answer! Because the next person who speaks is going to make a
purchase. If that’s Johnny Jones, he’s going to buy a “no sale.”
And that’s all, except for writing up the sale!
Of course, there’s everything else to do.
What happens when the prospect says this?
What happens when the prospect asks me that? And so forth.
But believe me, whether you’re selling sheets and pillow cases,
computers, swimming pools, flowers and fertilizer, canaries, puppies, or
Quonset huts, the Power Point Selling Process will work.
How do I know that?
Because it already has!
But if the Process is to work for you, you must be willing to go through it
the same way every single time. Using the same words the same way every
time. Reviewing the Financial Report the same way every time.
And by doing it the same way every single time, you will not have a
selling person but a selling system.
A Soft System.
A completely predictable technology for producing formerly
unpredictable results.
And you will be able to tell just how predictable it is through the use of an
Information System.
Information Systems
For an Information System to interact with the Soft System in our
example, it should provide you with the following information:
INFORMATION
BENCHMARK

--- page 189 ---
How many calls were made?
1
How many prospects were reached?
2
How many appointments were scheduled?
3
How many appointments were confirmed?
4
How many appointments were held?
5
How many Needs Analysis Presentations were scheduled?6
How many Needs Analyses were confirmed?
7
How many Needs Analyses were completed?
8
How many Solutions Presentations were scheduled?
9
How many Solutions Presentations were confirmed?
10
How many Solutions Presentations were completed?
11
How many solutions were sold?
12
What was the average dollar value?
13
The information should be recorded on a form, either manually or as a
database on your computer.
The Information System will track the activity of your Selling System
from Benchmark to Benchmark.
It will tell you an astonishing number of things.
It could tell you the rate of conversion between any two Benchmarks in
your Selling Process.
It could tell you at which Benchmark any particular salesperson needs
help. Which of your people are “on the system”—that is, using the Selling
System verbatim—and which ones are off it.
If you had calculated the cost of making a call, you could then calculate
the cost of completing the next Benchmark in the process, and from that
derive the next, and so on, until you calculate the actual cost of making one
sale.
In short, the Information System could tell you the things you need to

--- page 190 ---
know!
Things you don’t know now.
Things you need to know in order to develop, control, and change your
Selling System.
And things you also need to know in Finance and Production and Product
Development.
If your Systems Strategy is the glue that holds your Franchise Prototype
together, then information is the glue that holds your Systems Strategy
together.
It tells you when and why you need to change.
Without it, you might as well put on a blindfold, have someone turn you
around three times, and set out with a dart in your hand, waiting for a signal
from the heavens to throw it.
Not a very promising game.
But one, it seems, most people in small business are determined to play.
Hard Systems, Soft Systems, Information Systems.
Things, actions, ideas, information.
The stuff of which our lives are made, and the stuff of your business as
well.
Do you see how difficult it is to separate one from the other?
Do you see how intertwined they are?
Do you now understand what I mean by your business system?
And why it is absolutely essential that you begin to think of your business
as a fully integrated system?
That to approach any part of your business as though it were separate
from all the rest would be lunacy, because everything in your business affects
everything else in your business.
That your Primary Aim and your Strategic Objective and your
Organizational Strategy and your Management Strategy and your People
Strategy and your Marketing Strategy and your Systems Strategy—all of
them are totally interdependent, rather than independent of one another.
That the success of your Business Development Program totally depends
on your appreciation of that integration. And that your Prototype is that
integration.
If you understand all of that, then this book has been worth our time.
If you don’t, take off the blindfold, because there’s no going around one

--- page 191 ---
more time.
We’ve got business to attend to.
There’s no time left to trust a dart in the dark.
We were almost done. Sarah knew it and I knew it. All that was left was to tie
the pieces together. To help her to integrate everything we had talked about
together. To help her to see how it was all applicable—indeed, essential, to
her business All About Pies.
“I understand what you mean by Hard Systems,” she said. “The sign on
my shop, the floors, the walls, the display cases, the tables, my people’s
uniforms, and so forth. In other words, all of the visual elements of my
business and the way they all fit together. In fact, when it’s all done correctly,
the entire business should look like one fully integrated, beautifully designed
system.
“I even understand what you mean by Information Systems,” she
continued. “My ability to extract from the day-to-day operation of my shops
(she was already thinking about four shops, rather than one!), how many pies
are sold, what kind of pies, the time they were sold, how many customers
came in each shop and when, how many bought pies to go, how many slices
of pie were sold to eat on the premises, how many of the customers who
bought pie to eat on the premises bought a pie to go, and so forth. And I can
imagine a good deal more than that I would like to know now that I’ve begun
to think about it.
“What I don’t fully understand is the Soft Systems part. Can you tell me a
little bit more about that? I can’t possibly imagine my people using—what
did you call it? The Power Point Selling System?”
“I suspect you do without realizing it,” I said.
“Remember what I talked about early on when we were discussing
Innovation? ‘Hi, have you been in here before?’ as opposed to ‘Hi, can I help
you?’
“Well, what’s your version of that?
“Remember when we talked about the Game Worth Playing and the
recruitment process the Manager used at the hotel?
“What about the script he used when he told the story about the Boss’s
game? What’s your version of that?
“And remember when we talked about the hotel’s checklists, and then
went on to describe the Management System that defined them? What’s your

--- page 192 ---
version of that?
“In fact,” I continued, “every written or verbal communication with
anyone who comes into contact with your business is a Soft System. What so
few of us understand is the power of those words when they are totally
integrated. That your recruitment script, and your shop’s name, and the
training you conduct in your school, and the words in your customer
brochures, and your ads, everything you say, must work together just as the
visual components of your shop must work together, to make one powerfully
effective message.
“That you are All About Pies, and that there is no one, absolutely no one
else like you.
“There is no one else telling the same story.
“There is no one else using these same words in exactly the same way as
you are.
“And that these words represent the Idea behind All About Pies.
“The Idea that comes from your mind and your mind alone.
“The Idea that your aunt understood so well and that you understand so
well.
“The Idea of your business, which is the lifeblood of your business.
Which is the heart of your business. Which is the spirit of your business.
“And you know now how valuable that spirit is, Sarah. It’s to be
cherished. It’s to be shared with others. It’s to be set free upon the world.
“That’s what Soft Systems are. Do you get it now? Do you see how all of
this fits together into one lovely, endurable, however ever-changing,
wonderful whole?
“Can you see now why I say that The Technician’s role is not enough by
far? That there’s so much more to be done if your business is ever to live up
to its potential?
“And that it’s fun!”
Sarah was grinning from ear to ear.
For more information, visit us at www.e-myth.com.