# Chapter 10: The Business Development Process
book: TheEMythRevisited
pages: 93-104
section_id: chapter-10

--- page 93 ---
10
THE BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT
PROCESS
Tolerance for failure is a very specific part of the excellent company
culture—and that lesson comes directly from the top. Champions
have to make lots of tries and consequently suffer some failures or
the organization won’t learn.
Thomas J. Peters and Robert H. Waterman Jr.
In Search of Excellence
Building the Prototype of your business is a continuous process, a Business
Development Process. Its foundation is three distinct yet thoroughly
integrated activities through which your business can pursue its natural
evolution. They are Innovation, Quantification, and Orchestration.
Innovation
Innovation is often thought of as creativity. But as Harvard Professor
Theodore Levitt points out, the difference between creativity and Innovation
is the difference between thinking about getting things done in the world and
getting things done. Says Professor Levitt, “Creativity thinks up new things.
Innovation does new things.”1
The Franchise Revolution has brought with it an application of Innovation

--- page 94 ---
that has been almost universally ignored by American business. By
recognizing that it is not the commodity that demands Innovation but the
process by which it is sold, the franchisor aims his innovative energies at the
way in which his business does business.
To the franchisor, the entire process by which the business does business
is a marketing tool, a mechanism for finding and keeping customers. Each
and every component of the business system is a means through which the
franchisor can differentiate his business from all other businesses in the mind
of his consumer.
Where the business is the product, how the business interacts with the
consumer is more important than what it sells.
And the how doesn’t have to be expensive to be effective. In fact, some of
the most powerful Innovations have required little more than the change of a
few words, a gesture, the color of clothing.
For example, what does the salesperson in a retail store invariably say to
the incoming customer? He says, “May I help you?” Have you ever heard
that one before?
And how does the customer invariably respond? He says, “No thanks, just
looking.” Have you ever said that one before?
Of course you have!
In fact, it’s a universal phenomenon.
Now why do you suppose the salesperson asks that question when he
knows that the customer will respond the way he does?
Because the customer responds the way he does, that’s why!
If the customer is just looking, the salesperson doesn’t have to go to
work!
Can you imagine what those few words are costing retailers in this
country in lost sales? Here’s a perfect opportunity to try a simple and
inexpensive Innovation.
THE INNOVATION Instead of asking, “Hi, may I help you?” try “Hi,
have you been in here before?” The customer will respond with either a “yes”
or a “no.” In either case, you are then free to pursue the conversation.
If the answer is yes, you can say, “Great. We’ve created a special new
program for people who have shopped here before. Let me take just a minute
to tell you about it.”
If the answer is no, you can say, “Great, we’ve created a special new

--- page 95 ---
program for people who haven’t shopped here before. Let me take just a
minute to tell you about it.”
Of course, you’ll have to have created a special new program to talk
about in either case. But that’s the easy part.
Just think. A few simple words. Nothing fancy. But the result is
guaranteed to put money in your pocket. How much? That depends on how
enthusiastically you do it. The experience of our retail clients tells us that by
doing this one thing alone, sales will increase between 10 and 16 percent
almost immediately!
Can you believe it? A few simple words and sales instantly go up. Not by
just a little bit, mind you, but by a considerable amount! What would you do
for a 10-to 16-percent increase in sales?
THE INNOVATION Again, for salespeople, a six-week test. For the
first three weeks, wear a brown suit to work, a starched tan shirt, a brown tie
(for men), and well-polished brown shoes. Make certain that all the elements
of your suit are clean and well-pressed. For the following three weeks wear a
navy blue suit, a good, starched white shirt, a tie with red in it (a pin or a
scarf with red in it for women), and highly polished black shoes.
The result will be dramatic: sales will go up during the second three-week
period! Why? Because, as our clients have consistently discovered, blue suits
outsell brown suits! And it doesn’t matter who’s in them.
Is it any wonder that McDonald’s, Federal Express, Disney, Mrs. Field’s
Cookies, and many more extraordinary companies spend so much time and
money on determining how they look? It pays! And it pays consistently, over
and over and over again.
THE INNOVATION The next time you want somebody to do
something for you, touch him softly on the arm as you ask him to do it. You
will be amazed to find that more people will respond positively when you
touch them than when you don’t.
Again, to apply this to your business, you or your salespeople should
make a point of touching each customer on the elbow, arm, or back some
time during the sales process. You will find, as our clients have found, that
there will be a measurable increase in sales.
Innovation is the heart of every exceptional business. Innovation continually

--- page 96 ---
poses the question: What is standing in the way of my customer getting what
he wants from my business?
For the Innovation to be meaningful it must always take the customer’s
point of view. At the same time, Innovation simplifies your business to its
critical essentials. It should make things easier for you and your people in the
operation of your business; otherwise it’s not Innovation but complication.
Innovation, then, is the mechanism through which your business identifies
itself in the mind of your customer and establishes its individuality. It is the
result of a scientifically generated and quantifiably verified profile of your
customer’s perceived needs and unconscious expectations.
It is the skill developed within your business and your people that is
constantly asking, “What is the best way to do this?” knowing, even as the
question is asked, that we will never discover the best way, but by asking we
will assuredly discover a way that’s better than the one we know now.
In that regard, I think of Innovation as the “Best Way” skill. It produces a
high level of energy in every company within which it’s nurtured, fed, and
stimulated, energy that in turn feeds everyone the company touches—its
employees, customers, suppliers, and lenders. In an innovative company
everyone grows.
There’s no doubt about it: Innovation is the signature of a bold,
imaginative hand.
Quantification
But on its own, Innovation leads nowhere. To be at all effective, all
Innovations need to be quantified. Without Quantification, how would you
know whether the Innovation worked?
By Quantification, I’m talking about the numbers related to the impact an
Innovation makes.
For example, ask any group of small business owners how many selling
opportunities they had the day before (as we have at E-Myth Worldwide day
after day) and I promise you 99 percent of them won’t know the answer.
The sad fact is that Quantification is not being done in most businesses.
And it’s costing them a fortune!
For example, how would you know that by changing the words you use to
greet an incoming customer you produced a 16-percent increase in sales
unless you quantified it by (1) determining how many people came in the

--- page 97 ---
door before the Innovation was put into effect; (2) determining how many
people bought products and what the dollar value of those products were
before you changed the words and what you said to produce those sales; (3)
counting the number of people who came in the door after you changed the
words; (4) counting the number of people who purchased something; (5)
determining the average unit value of a sale; and (6) determining what the
improvement was as a result of your Innovation? These numbers enable you
to determine the precise value of your Innovation.
How would you know that wearing a blue suit had a specific monetary
impact on your business unless you quantified that impact and had a specific
control against which to measure it? The answer is obvious; you wouldn’t.
And as I’ve said, few small business owners do quantify these things,
even those who believe in Quantification.
Because few small business owners believe that such apparently
insignificant Innovations are really that important!
But ask yourself, if you could increase sales 10 percent by doing
something as simple as wearing a blue suit, would you do it? Would you
make it important? The answer is as obvious as the question is ridiculous. Of
course you would!
And it is the obvious that must be addressed by Quantification at the
outset of the Business Development Process.
Begin by quantifying everything related to how you do business.
I mean everything.
How many customers do you see in person each day?
How many in the morning?
In the afternoon?
How many people call your business each day?
How many call to ask for a price?
How many want to purchase something?
How many of product X are sold each day?
At what time of the day are they sold?
How many are sold each week?
Which days are busiest? How busy?
And so forth.
You can’t ask too many questions about the numbers.
Eventually, you and your people will think of your entire business in
terms of the numbers.

--- page 98 ---
You’ll quantify everything.
You’ll be able to read your business’s health chart by the flow of the
numbers.
You’ll know which numbers are critical and which are not.
You’ll become as familiar with your business’s numbers as your doctor is
with your blood pressure and pulse rates.
Because without the numbers you can’t possibly know where you are, let
alone where you’re going. With the numbers, your business will take on a
totally new meaning.
It will come alive with possibilities.
Orchestration
Once you innovate a process and quantify its impact on your business,
once you find something that works better than what preceded it, once you
discover how to increase the “yeses” from your customers, your employees,
your suppliers, and your lenders—at that point, it’s time to orchestrate the
whole thing.
Orchestration is the elimination of discretion, or choice, at the operating
level of your business.
Without Orchestration, nothing could be planned, and nothing anticipated
—by you or your customer. If you’re doing everything differently each time
you do it, if everyone in your company is doing it by their own discretion,
their own choice, rather than creating order, you’re creating chaos.
As Theodore Levitt says in his stunning book, Marketing for Business
Growth, “Discretion is the enemy of order, standardization, and quality.”2
“If a blue suit works, wear it every single time you’re in front of a
customer,” is the dictum of the disciples of Orchestration.
“If ‘Hi, have you been in here before?’ works better than anything else
you’ve tried, say it every single time you greet a customer,” is the rule of the
day from the disciples of Orchestration.
By every disciple of Orchestration I’m referring to anyone who has ever
seriously decided to produce a consistent, predictable result in the world of
business, no matter what business they are in.
Whether that be Fred Smith at Federal Express, Tom Watson at IBM, Ray

--- page 99 ---
Kroc at McDonald’s, Walt Disney at Disney, Debbie and Randy Fields at
Mrs. Fields’ Cookies, or whomever, throughout the course of time.
Because every founder of every great Business Format Franchise
company, whether it is franchised or not, knows one thing to be true: if you
haven’t orchestrated it, you don’t own it!
And if you don’t own it, you can’t depend on it.
And if you can’t depend on it, you haven’t got a franchise.
And without a franchise no business can hope to succeed.
If, by a franchise, you understand that I’m talking about a proprietary way
of doing business that differentiates your business from everyone else’s.
In short, the definition of a franchise is simply your unique way of doing
business.
And unless your unique way of doing business can be replicated every
single time, you don’t own it. You have lost it. And once you’ve lost it,
you’re out of business!
The need for Orchestration is based on the absolutely quantifiable
certainty that people will do only one thing predictably—be unpredictable.
But for your business to be predictable, your people must be.
Then what?
Then the system must provide the vehicle to facilitate predictability.
To do what?
To give your customer what he wants every single time.
Why?
Because unless your customer gets everything he wants every single time,
he’ll go someplace else to get it!
Orchestration is the glue that holds you fast to your customers’
perceptions.
Orchestration is the certainty that is absent from every other human
experience. It is the order and the logic behind the human craving for reason.
Orchestration is as simple as doing what you do, saying what you say,
looking like you look—being how and who you are—for as long as it works.
For as long as it produces the results you want.
And when it doesn’t work any longer, change it!
The Business Development Process is not static.
It’s not something you do and then are done with.
It’s something you do all the time.
In other words, once you’ve innovated, quantified, and orchestrated

--- page 100 ---
something in your business, you must continue to innovate, quantify, and
orchestrate it.
The Business Development Process is dynamic, simply because the
world, moving as it does, will not tolerate a stationary object.
The world will collide with whatever you’ve created, and sooner or later
destroy it.
The Business Development Process is that which enables you to preempt
the world’s changes. It hopefully precedes them, anticipates them, and, if not,
at least is infinitely flexible in relationship to them.
In short, Innovation, Quantification, and Orchestration are the backbone
of every extraordinary business.
They are the essence of your Business Development Process.
“I need you to help me with something,” Sarah said, a look of concern on her
face. “I need help coming to grips with this whole subject of Orchestration. It
sounds so mechanical, so deadening! When I think of it, I picture a shop full
of people working dispassionately, each of them doing things in identically
the same way, like robots. Certainly you can’t be saying that. But I don’t
know how else to think about it.”
She paused with uncertainty, but then, as though deciding she had made
her point, grew quiet and waited for my answer.
“Sarah,” I began softly, “if the Business Development Process were only
about Orchestration, I would agree with you—it would be deadly. Absent a
higher purpose, all habits are. Because that’s all that Orchestration really is,
Sarah: a habit. A way of doing something habitually.
“The problem is you can’t understand the value of an entire process by
separating it from its parts, or its parts from the process. Because once you
separate the parts of a process, once you take a process apart, there is no
process. There is no movement whatsoever. There is only this thing or that.
There is no beginning, no middle, no end. There is no story; there’s only an
event, frozen in time. You might say that apart from its process, the part of a
process is dead. So when you think of Orchestration absent Innovation and
Quantification, you’re describing an action stripped of its purpose, its
meaning, its vitality.
“No, to fully understand the role any action—or any piece of work—
plays in the business as a whole, you have to see it as a part of the whole, not
as a thing in itself. Let me show you what I mean.

--- page 101 ---
“Think back to your aunt’s kitchen. Think about the process of baking a
pie. Certainly when you remember the entire process you and your aunt went
through, you remember much more than any single part of it, isn’t that true?”
Sarah smiled warmly, reliving the experience in her aunt’s kitchen. “Yes,
of course that’s true,” she responded.
“It all melts together into a sensation, you might say. Into a picture, and
smells, and movements, and things, fused together with my aunt’s remarks
and her laughter and her hands doing the things they did on the cutting board.
Exactly the opposite of what I imagine Orchestration to be,” she said firmly.
“In fact, that’s what was so special to me about the kitchen. The creativity of
it all. The continuous stream of surprises.”
“But think about it, Sarah. Is that really true? Wasn’t there a specific way
your aunt taught you to cut the fruit? A specific way to hold it? A specific
way to prepare it? Wasn’t there a specific way to do everything your aunt
taught you to do? And wasn’t the creativity, the continuous stream of
surprises, a result not just of the specific work you were doing but of your
continuous and exhilarating experience of improving as you learned how to
do those very specific tasks better and better, until you could do them almost
as well as your aunt?
“Wasn’t that where the joy came from? That if you were resigned to
doing one thing, one way, forever, without ever improving, there would be no
joy—there would only be the same deadening routine? And isn’t that what
your aunt taught you as she taught you to bake pies—the mystery that change
can bring?
“So, of course, there needs to be Orchestration, Sarah. There needs to be a
way we do something. There needs to be a set routine. Because without it,
there would be nothing to improve upon. And without improvement, there
would be no reason to be. We would be machines. Or, as you called them,
‘robots.’ There would be the tyranny of routine. There would be the
monotony and the boredom you so eloquently describe.
“But with the process, with the continuous Innovation and Quantification
that precedes the Orchestration and that follows it, with this continuous
investigation into the way of work, the work itself becomes key to our own
personal transformation. The work itself becomes something other than a
habit; it becomes an exploration into who we are and how we express
ourselves in relationship to something much larger. First, the position we fill.
Then the function it fills. Then the business within which the function fulfills

--- page 102 ---
both itself and the business, without which it wouldn’t exist. Then the world
within which the business fulfills its purpose as well as the purpose of the
people with whom, and for whom, it comes into contact. And so on, and so
forth.
“What I’ve just described is the thrill of apprenticeship, the learning and
growing that you experienced in the kitchen under your aunt’s tutelage.
“That’s one level of experience. But there are more.
“A second kind of experience is when you begin to develop a certain level
of mastery of the orchestrated skills your aunt introduced you to, mastery that
comes from your practice. That’s the mastery of the craftsperson.
“The craftsperson develops a knowingness about the work she does that
bears its own fruit, the fruit of being present, or attentive. The craftsperson
learns that within the work she does there is a jewel hiding below the surface.
That the thrill of the craft is to discover the jewel. And that there is only one
way to discover it: to practice the craft mindlessly. To become one with the
work. To polish and polish, as though with one’s heart. That there is no way
to know when the jewel will show itself, but to trust with all one’s heart that
one day, when it is least expected, the jewel will be there! It will appear.
“And so the craftsperson is one who has reached that stage of her
development where she is content with the work, and only the work, knowing
that it is only through being there with one’s work that the jewel will reveal
itself, and that it is the work, and only the work, raised to the level of near
perfection that connects the craftsperson with herself, with her own heart.
And so she practices, day in and day out, content to do so, without the thrill
of the apprentice to keep her going, but knowing deep inside that there is no
place to go but here.
“Unlike the apprentice’s stage, the craftsperson’s stage is long and
relatively serene until that day when the jewel does appear, and with it a
stunning explosion of light enraptures the craftsperson and brings with it
mastery.
“You’ve seen mastery before, Sarah. You’ve seen it in your aunt’s face,
in her eyes, in the way she spoke to you. For the master, there is only one
way and that is to teach another. The master is connected to the apprentice as
though to her past. As you are to your childhood. The master knows that the
process of growing, of change, of transformation, is always moving, never
still. It is in the face of the apprentice that the master sees herself anew. It is
in the face of the craftsperson that the master renews her pilgrimage and finds

--- page 103 ---
the beauty of giving herself up to work. It is in the face of the work that the
master discovers anew why she is so enraptured and, in so doing, brings her
rapture to the apprentice to start all over again.
“In much the same way, Orchestration builds upon that which preceded it,
and becomes the foundation for that which is about to follow, and, in the
process, honors the past, the present, and the future.
“To me, Sarah, that is what the Business Development Process is all
about; it is a search, within which the very ordinary things we must do from
day-to-day are the essential hub of the wheel around which the search moves.
“On a more practical level, what we’ve experienced in our work with
small businesses is that, as the Business Development Process becomes an
integral part of the business, it also becomes an integral part of the
communication between the participants. It becomes not only a way of
thinking and a way of doing but a way of being as well. You might say that,
while going to work on the business, people begin to realize that it is a
powerful metaphor for going to work on their lives.
“And that, I believe, is the heart of the process: not efficiency, not
effectiveness, not more money, not to ‘downsize’ or ‘get lean,’ but to simply
and finally create more life for everyone who comes into contact with the
business, but most of all, for you, the person who owns it.
“So, I obviously feel passionately about the subject. What you call it
doesn’t really matter; call it the Business Development Process,
Reengineering, TQM, Excellence, or Kaizen—the entire subject becomes a
desultory process if it doesn’t address the hearts and minds and souls of
people.
“Quality is just a word, and an empty word at that, if it doesn’t include
harmony, balance, passion, intention, attention.
“Continuous improvement for its own sake is a waste of time.
“Life is what a business is about, and life is what this work is about.
Coming to grips with oneself, in the face of an incredibly complex world that
can teach us if we’re open to learn.
“In this way, the Business Development Process can be thought of as a
metaphor for personal transformation, for coming to grips with real life.
“For developing real skills within a structure of your own design.
“For understanding the dynamics of change, of value, of communication,
of thought.
“It’s an idea. An idea that we at E-Myth Worldwide have learned to

--- page 104 ---
manifest in the practical world. It is a philosophy. It is a cosmology. It is
whatever you wish it to be.
“But what it is, in the end, is an opportunity to fulfill whatever is
fulfillable in the place you find yourself now, and in any future place you
could occupy with enough imagination and enough of a wish.”
I suddenly became aware that I had been going on without checking in
with Sarah. I’ve been known to do that at times.
“I’m sorry, Sarah. I got carried away with the idea and the sound of my
own voice. Do you have any questions? Can I be more specific?”
Sarah touched my hands on the table, and said, “My head is full of
questions, but somehow I think you’re going to answer them. I just want to
thank you for doing what you just did. If you don’t mind, could we go on and
talk about how all this works?”
I took a sip of tea, and went on.