# Epilogue
book: TheEMythRevisited
pages: 198-203
section_id: epilogue

--- page 198 ---
EPILOGUE
BRINGING THE DREAM BACK TO
AMERICAN SMALL BUSINESS
You should know now that a man of knowledge lives by acting, not
by thinking about acting, not by thinking about what he will think
when he has finished acting. A man of knowledge chooses a path
with heart and follows it.
Carlos Castaneda
A Separate Reality
This book is not simply a prescription for success; it’s a call to arms.
But this call to arms is not a call to do battle. It’s a call to learning.
How to feel, think, and act differently and more productively, more
humanly than our existing skills and understanding allow. Today’s world is a
difficult place. Humankind has experienced more change in the past twenty
years than it has in the 2,000 that preceded them.
Boundaries that once served us—geographically, politically, socially,
emotionally—no longer exist. The rules are constantly changing. But people
cannot live without boundaries, without structure, without rules. So new ones
have sprung up and proliferated in order to fill the void left by those that no
longer seem to serve our “New Age” condition.
Unfortunately, in a world of accelerated change there is little time for
rules to take hold. As soon as the new rules are upon us, they too are
swallowed up in the insatiable vortex of change, followed all too quickly by

--- page 199 ---
more rules, and then still more.
The result of all this change is chaos and disorder, each change bringing
with it an even more turbulent world than the one before it with fewer and
fewer traditions to hold on to. A world in trouble, where confusion reigns.
But the trouble didn’t start “out there” in the world. If it did, we’d really
be in trouble. Because who among us knows enough to control or even have
an impact on what’s happening “out there”? If it is so difficult for us to do
anything about our businesses, how in the world are we going to do anything
about the world?
We can’t. It’s that simple. And any call to arms that suggests we can is a
stopgap measure, a call to disillusionment and ultimately to disaster. Because
our stopgap measures are not solutions. Our feeble attempts to fix the world
can’t change the overall condition. If they work at all, they can only change
the circumstances in which we find ourselves at any given moment.
No, we can’t change the world “out there.” And fortunately, we don’t
have to; we can begin much closer to home. We can begin “in here.” In fact,
if we’re to succeed, we must. Because the chaos isn’t “out there” in everyone
else. It’s not “out there” in the world. The chaos is “in here” in you and me.
The world’s not the problem; you and I are.
The world’s not in chaos; we are.
The world’s apparent chaos is only a reflection of our own inner turmoil.
If the world reflects a lack of good sense, it’s because each one of us
reflects the same. If the world acts as if it doesn’t know what it’s doing, it’s
because each one of us acts the same. If the world is violent, and greedy, and
heartless, and inhuman, and often just plain stupid, it is because you and I are
that way.
So if the world is going to be changed, we must first change our lives!
Unfortunately, we haven’t been taught to think that way. We are an “out
there” society, accustomed to thinking in terms of them against us. We want
to fix the world so that we can remain the same. And for an “out there”
society, coming “inside” is a problem.
But now is the time to learn how. Now is the time to change.
Because unless we do, the chaos will remain.
And we can’t afford this kind of chaos much longer.
We’re simply running out of time.

--- page 200 ---
Bridging the Gap
And that’s what this book is really about. Bridging the gap.
Between the “outside” and the “inside.”
Between the world “out there” and the world “in here.”
And your small business can become that bridge. The bridge between you
and the world. The bridge that can draw together the world “out there” and
the world “in here” in such a way as to make both more human. In such a
way that makes both more productive. In such a way that makes both worlds
work.
For like the Boss’s hotel, your small business can become your dojo, your
practice hall. Joe Hyams, in his book Zen in the Martial Arts, tells us what a
dojo is:
A dojo is a miniature cosmos where we make contact with ourselves—our
fears, anxieties, reactions, and habits. It is an arena of confined conflict
where we confront an opponent who is not an opponent but rather a
partner engaged in helping us understand ourselves more fully. It is a
place where we can learn a great deal in a short time about who we are
and how we react in the world. The conflicts that take place inside the
dojo help us handle conflicts that take place outside. The total
concentration and discipline required to study martial arts carries over to
daily life. The activity in the dojo calls on us to constantly attempt new
things, so it is also a source of learning—in Zen terminology, a source of
self-enlightenment.1
And that is exactly what a small business is!
A small business is a place that responds instantly to any action we take.
A place where we can practice implementing ideas in a way that changes
lives. A place where we can begin to test all of the assumptions we have
about ourselves. It is a place where questions are at least as important as
answers, if not more so. It is a place where generalizations must give way to
specifics. It is a place that demands our attention. A place where rules must
be followed and order preserved. A place that is practical, not idealistic. But a
place where idealism must be present for the practical to serve. It is a place
where the world is reduced to manageable size. Small enough to be
responsive, but big enough to test everything we have. A true practice hall.

--- page 201 ---
A world of our own.
A World of Our Own
And that after all is the “Dream of American Small Business,” the dream
that has served as the catalyst for so many entrepreneurial—and not so
entrepreneurial—efforts.
To create a world of our own.
What is this Entrepreneurial Revolution people are talking about today,
where millions of us are going into business for ourselves?
It’s nothing more than a flight from the world of chaos “out there” into a
world of our own.
It’s a yearning for structure, for form, for control. And for something else
as well. Something more personal. Something less distinct, yet much more
intimately connected with who we are as human beings. It’s a yearning for
relationship with ourselves and the world in a way impossible to experience
in a job.
Unfortunately, as we’ve already seen, the “dream” is rarely realized; most
small businesses fail. And the reason is obvious. We bring our chaos with us.
We don’t change. We try to change “out there.” We try to change the
world by starting a small business—but we stay the same!
And so the small business that was started to give us a new world
becomes instead the worst job in the world!
The lesson to learn from all this is simple: we can’t change our lives by
starting “out there.” All we can produce in the process is more chaos!
We can only change our lives and create a world of our own if we first
understand how such a world is constructed, how it works, and the rules of
the game. And that means we have to study the world and how we are in it.
And in order to do that we need a world small enough in scope and
complexity to study.
A small business is just such a world.
And a Business Development Program can be a means to study it most
effectively.
And the Franchise Prototype can provide our study with the discipline it
needs to succeed.
Innovation, Quantification, and Orchestration become the practice that

--- page 202 ---
brings us and our opponent—whoever that may be—to the discovery of our
limits, our weaknesses, our strengths. To the discovery of what really works
in the world rather than what our imaginations might wish would work. For
in a martial arts contest, there is no room for imagination. We could get killed
out there!
Innovation, Quantification, and Orchestration provide the belief system of
our business, the philosophical bedrock of our interaction with the world.
They become our source for learning, for creating, for expanding beyond our
self-imposed limits.
And through Innovation, Quantification, and Orchestration our business
can become something more than merely a place to go to work. It can
become a place that satisfies more of ourselves than just The Technician.
There is a place in Business Development for the whole of ourselves. For the
innovator, for the maintainer, for the doer. For The Entrepreneur, The
Manager, and The Technician in each one of us.
Your small business and mine can give us more life.
An Idea for Action
But does it work?
Will the model of the Franchise Prototype work for you?
There is an old Chinese proverb that says:
When you hear something, you will forget it.
When you see something, you will remember it.
But not until you do something, will you understand it.
In short, my answer is a resounding, “Yes!” It does work. Every time it’s
applied. And it will work for you. It works because it requires the full
engagement of the people working it. It can’t be done half-heartedly. It can’t
be done frenetically. It can only be done intelligently, reasonably,
intentionally, systematically, and compassionately.
The very Process of Business Development creates instantaneous change
in the people who engage in it.
And that is the key to its success.

--- page 203 ---
Those who engage in the process must remember their aim in order to
continue it. And in the process of remembering, their aim becomes tethered
to something real in the world—their business. A place in which aims can be
tested in a concrete, practical way. The business becomes a symbol for the
life they wish to live, a visible manifestation of who they are and what they
believe. A living, active, evolving testament to the will of man.
But, I ask you not to think about it anymore.
It’s time to act.
Because until you do, you won’t understand it.
And when you do, there will be nothing left to think about—you’ll be
well on your way.
Until then, it’s just another good idea, just another creative thought.
It’s time to turn it into an innovation.
It’s time to Bring the Dream Back to American Small Business.
It’s been gone far too long.